My dear countrymen, Namaskar. As usual, you and I eagerly keep waiting for ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This time too, numerous letters, comments & phone calls have poured in – full of stories, suggestions & inspiration – everybody wants to do something or the other; also wanting to say it out. One can feel that sentiment. All this touches upon myriad facets which I wish to sum up, but cannot do so on account of constraints of time duration. It seems I am being put to test. Yet, once again I want to offer you your own precious thoughts, woven together on the singular thread of Mann Ki Baat.
It must be part of your recent memory that in the earlier episode, I had referred to a collection of short stories by Premchand ji, We had decided that on reading any book, some of its facets should be shared with all through the Narendra Modi App. I have seen that people in large numbers have shared a lot of information on a variety of books. It is heartwarming to see them discuss books published on subjects such as Science, Technology, innovation, history, culture, business, life-sketches and so on. Some have advised me to dwell upon many other books. Fine. I shall discuss with you on other books as well. But I must candidly admit here that I am not able to devote much time to reading books these days. But I have gained a lot, in the sense that based on your correspondence here, I got opportunities to know about the themes of many kinds of books. But the experience over the last one month makes me feel that we need to take it forward. Why don’t we create a permanent book corner on the Narendra Modi App, so that, whenever we read a book, we write about it and discuss it on this platform! And you can even suggest an apt name for our book corner. I want this book corner to be an active forum for readers & writers alike. So keep reading & writing; sharing with all friends of Mann Ki Baat alongside.
Friends, I touched upon the subject of water conservation in Mann Ki Baat and today I feel that it was an issue close to your heart even before I referred to it, a matter of universal human interest. I have experienced the fact that this topic has stirred the nation’s heart strings collectively. Many an informed, effective endeavour is afoot across the country. People have shared information on traditional methods. The media has embarked upon quite a few innovative campaigns. Be it the Government or NGOs, something or the other is being carried out on a war footing. Witnessing the might of the collective is in itself heartwarming & satisfying. A case in point is village Aara Keram under the Ormanjhi block, not very far from Ranchi in Jharkhand. The fervour & Zeal displayed by villagers there towards water conservation has turned out to be exemplary for one & all. The rural folk donated sweat, toiling collectively, to change the course of a mountain spring. It was a purely indigenous, home grown method. This has led to not only stopping soil erosion & prevention of crop damage, but also facilitated effective irrigation of fields. And you will be happy to know that the beautiful North Eastern State of Meghalaya has become the first state to have formulated its own water-policy. I congratulate the Government of Meghalaya.
In Haryana, crops that require meagre water are being encouraged. Farmers thus are saved from suffering losses. I specially congratulate the Haryana Government for establishing a connect with the farmers to wean them away from conventional modes of farming towards crops that do not require much water.
It is the season of festivals. Many fairs are held on these occasions. Why don’t we use these fairs to spread the message of water conservation? All sections of society turn up in fairs in large numbers. Here, we can effectively spread awareness on the need to save water through forums such as exhibitions and street plays, thus using the festive fervour to convey the message of water conservation with ease.
Friends, certain turns in life make our hearts swell with joy & zest; especially our children’s achievements, their feats fill us up with energy. And that is why today, I feel like mentioning about a few children. They are Nidhi Baipotu, Monish Joshi, Devanshi Rawat, Tanush Jain, Harsh Devdharkar, Anant Tiwari, Preeti Nag, Atharva Deshmukh, Aronyatesh Ganguli & Hrithik Alaamandaa.
What I tell you about them will fill your hearts with pride & verve as well. All of us know that just the word CANCER is more than enough to scare the world. It conjures images of Death waiting at the doorstep. But each of these Ten children, not only fought against the dreaded disease cancer in their battle of life, but also brought glory & laurels to the country. In sports and games, we often get to see a player becoming a champion after winning a tournament or bagging a medal; this was a rare occasion when the participants were champions BEFORE they entered the contest… they were champions of LIFE, the battle.
Actually, this month, the World Children’s Winners Games were held in Moscow. It is a unique sports tournament meant for young cancer survivors; only they who have emerged fighting cancer, can take part. In this tournament, sports & games such as shooting, chess, swimming, running, football & table-tennis are organized. All Ten champions of our country won medals in this tournament. Out of these, some players even won more than one medal.
My dear countrymen, I firmly believe that you must have felt immensely proud on India’s achievement beyond the skies… in outer space… Chandrayaan II.
People from across the country, such as Sanjiv Haripura from Jodhpur, Rajasthan, Mahendra Kumar Daga from Kolkata, P. Arvind Rao from Telangana, and many others have written to me on Narendra Modi App and mygov, urging me to speak on Chandrayaan II in Mann Ki Baat.
In fact, in the realms of Space, 2019 has been a very fruitful year for India. Our scientists launched the A-Sat in March. After that, amidst the hectic engagements during Elections, an important development such as the A-Sat could not be a prominent part of the discourse. Whereas the fact is, through the A-Sat, we have acquired the capability of destroying a satellite three hundred Kilometres away in a mere three minutes. India became the fourth country in the world, possessing this capacity. And now, on the 22nd of July, the nation watched with pride Chandrayaan II taking strides into space from Sriharikota. Visuals of Chandrayaan II lifting off filled our countrymen’s hearts with glory, zest and joy.
Chandrayaan II is a mission that is special on many counts. It will lead to a better understanding of the Moon on our part. We will be able to gather detailed information & knowledge. But if you ask me what the two greatest lessons I have received from Chandrayaan II, I shall say they are Faith & Fearlessness. We should trust our talents & capacities; we should have faith in them. You will be glad to know that Chandrayaan II is INDIAN to the core. It is thoroughly Indian in heart & spirit. It is completely a swadeshi, home grown mission. This mission has proved beyond doubt, once again, that when it comes to attempting an endeavour in new age, cutting edge areas, with innovative zeal, our scientists are second to none. They are the best… they are world class.
The second important lesson is – never lose hope in the face of stumbling blocks or obstacles. The way our scientists rectified Technical issues in record time, burning the midnight oil, is in itself an exemplary, unparalleled task. The world watched the Tapasya, the awesome perseverance of our scientists. We should also feel proud of the fact that despite hindrances, there is no change in the arrival time… many are amazed at that. We have to face temporary setbacks in life… but always remember- the capacity to overcome them resides within us. I fervently hope that the Chandrayaan II mission will inspire our youth towards Science & Innovation. After all, Science is the path to progress. We are now expectantly waiting for the month of September, when Lander Vikram & Rover Pragyan will land on Lunar surface.
Through Mann Ki Baat today, I wish to share with students, my young friends, information on a very interesting competition … I invite young boys & girls to a Quiz Competition. Your inquisitiveness regarding Space, India’s Space Mission, Science and Technology will be the salient features of this Quiz Competition. For example, How is a rocket launched, how is a satellite placed in orbit, what information do we gather from a satellite, what is A-Sat… and many more of these. The details of this competition will be available on the Mygov website.
I urge my young friends, students to participate in this competition and make it interesting and memorable through their participation. I specially call upon schools, parents, enthusiastic teachers & mentors to strive hard to ensure victory for their respective schools. Encourage all students to join. And the most thrilling part is that students scoring the highest in their respective states will be invited to visit Sriharikota, with expenses borne by the Government. There in September they will get an opportunity to witness the moment when Chandrayaan would be landing on the surface of the Moon. For these winners, it will be a historic event of their life. But for that, you will have to participate in the Quiz competition, score the highest & be a winner.
Friends, I’m sure you must have liked my suggestion… isn’t this an interesting opportunity? So, let us not forget to participate in the Quiz… let us encourage & inspire as many friends & fellow students to do the same.
My dear countrymen, you must have observed one thing. Our chain of Mann Ki Baat has lent pace to the cleanliness campaign from time to time. Similarly, efforts towards ensuring cleanliness have always inspired Mann Ki Baat. A journey that began five years ago gathered momentum with mass participation & is now setting up newer benchmarks in cleanliness & sanitation. It is not that we have reached the ideal yet, but the way we have achieved success in ODF & clean public spaces, it displays the collective will & strength of the resolve of a hundred & thirty crore countrymen. But we are not stopping at that. This movement has now advanced from cleanliness towards beautification. Just a few days ago, I was watching the story of Shriman Yogesh Saini and his team on the media.  Yogesh Saini is an engineer who left his job in America and returned to serve Mother India. Recently, he has picked up the gauntlet to not just clean up Delhi, but to beautify it. With his team, he began with the garbage bins of Lodi Garden. Through the medium of street art, he has decorated many localities of Delhi with aesthetically appealing paintings. From over bridges to school walls to hutments he gave a free hand to his talent, garnering huge public support on the way, on the lines of an effective campaign. Remember how, during the Kumbh, Prayagraj was decorated with street paintings! I came to know that Yogesh Saini & his team played a stellar role in it. Colours & lines may be mute, but when they merge to form a picture, the rainbow that emanates speaks louder than a thousand words. We experience this in the beauty, the aesthetics of the Swachchata Abhiyan. It is imperative that the culture of transforming waste to wealth develops in our society. In a way, we have to move ahead on the path of converting garbage to gold.
My dear countrymen, a few days ago, I read a very interesting comment on My gov. This comment came from Brother Muhammad Aslam who stays in Shopian, Jammu & Kashmir.
He wrote, “I like listening to the programme Mann Ki Baat. I am happy to let you know that I played a positive active role in organizing the community mobilisation programme- Back to Village in my state Jammu & Kashmir. This programme was organized in the month of June. I feel such programmes should be organized every quarter. Simultaneously, there should be a provision for online monitoring too. According to me, this was a one of a kind programme where the public directly entered into a dialogue with the Government.
Brother Mohd Aslam ji had sent me a message upon reading which I felt curious to know more about the ‘Back to village’ programme and when I got to knew it at length, I felt that the entire nation should get to know about this programme.
The people of Kashmir are eager to join the national main stream, their enthusiasm is reflected in the mechanism of this programme. For the first time, senior officials reached the villages, directly, even those officials who had never visited a village were available to the villagers at their doorsteps, to judge for themselves to gauge the obstacles in the path of progress and to remove the hurdles. This week long programme encompassing about 4500 panchayats witnessed the govt. officials briefing the villagers about the schemes and programmes implemented by the Government and also inquired whether these facilities were available to them or not.
How to impart more might to the Panchayats? How to increase their income? And how the facilities rendered by panchayats can affect the day to day life, were topics that were discussed and people too interacted in a participatory fashion telling about their problems. Literacy, sex ratio, health, hygiene, water conservation, electricity, water, Girl education, senior citizen’s concerns etc. were some of the topics that were discussed at length.
Friends, this programme was not a mere Government formality that officials roam around the village and return to base, instead of this the officials spent two days and a night at the panchayat, enabling them to spend time in the village and meet almost every denizen of the village and to reach across to every establishment in the village. To make this programme even more interesting many other means were employed. Many sports competitions for kids were organized under the aegis of ‘Khelo India’. Sports Kits, MNREGA job cards and SC/ST certificates were distributed. There were Financial Literacy camps and Agriculture and Horticulture Department set up stalls where knowledge about govt. schemes was disseminated. In this manner, this programme became a festival celebrating development, a festival of people’s participation and a festival of people’s awakening! .
The people of Kashmir open heartedly became equal stakeholders in this festival. The most heartening aspect of ‘Back to village’ programme is the fact, that it was organized in such remote villages, where even officials had to traverse difficult terrain and climb mountains while walking on foot over a period of day or day and a half. These officials also reached the panchayats on the border which live under the shadow of cross-border firing, not only this the officials reached the sensitive villages in the districts of Shopian, Pulwama, Kulgam and Anantnag, without any fear. Some officers were so overwhelmed by the reception they received, that they decided to extend their stay upto two days in these villages. The organizing of Gram Sabhas in these villages, wherein the people participated in large numbers and chalked out schemes for themselves is something that is an extremely pleasant experience. A new resolve, a new fervor and grand results. Programmes like these and people’s participation or stake holding indicates that our brothers and sisters in Kashmir want good Governance and proves the dictum that the power of development is stronger than the might of bullets and bombs. It is clear that those who wish to spread hatred en route to development, pose hurdles will never succeed in their sinister plans.
My dear countrymen, Shriman Dattatraya Ramchandra Bendre, gyanpith laureate and poet has described the significance of the month of Sawan in this manner- in his poem.
होडिगे मडिगे आग्येद लग्ना | अदराग भूमि मग्ना |
Meaning that the relationship between drizzling rain and stream of water is wondrous and earth gets bedazzled by such spectacle! In entire India, people of different cultures and languages, celebrate the onset of rainy season in their own fashion. Whenever we look around us in this season it appears as if earth has draped itself in a sheet of greenery! There is generation of renewed energy all around us. In this pious season many devotees perform the Kanwad Yatra and many proceed on the Amarnath pilgrimage, many observe fasts and eagerly wait for festivals like Janamasthmi and Nag Panchmi. It is during this season that the festival of Raksha Bandhan symbolizing the bond between a brother and sister also falls.
While we are talking of the month of sawan, you will be glad to learn that the number of pilgrims in the Amarnath Yatra this year has been the greatest in the past 4 years. A total of 3 lakh pilgrims have had the darshan of the holy Amarnath shrine from 1st July till now. In 2015, the number of devotees who performed this pilgrimage over 60 days has been crossed over by the number of pilgrims in mere 28 days this year!
I would especially like to thank the hospitality of the people of Jammu- Kashmir while referring to successful organization of Amarnath Yatra. Those who return after performing this pilgrimage become imbued with the feelings of warmth and kinship displayed by the people of the state. These are portents of booming tourism in the future. I have been told that within a span of a month- and- a half of the commencement of Chardham Yatra in Uttarakhand this year, more than 8 lakh devotees have had the darshan of Kedarnath Shrine. This is a record number of pilgrims post the apocalyptic events of 2013.
I appeal to all of you to visit those tourist spots within our country whose scenic beauty is to behold during the monsoon. There are no better ways to witness this nation’s beauty and people’s sentiments and no better teachers than tourism and pilgrimage.
I extend my felicitation to you all, that may this beauteous and lively month of Sawan fill all of us with new energy, new hopes and new expectations. The month of August also brings the memories of ‘Quit India’ movement. I wish that all of us celebrate 15th August with special preparations and find out new ways to observe this festival of freedom with greater participation of masses. You must ponder over the fact how 15th August could be celebrated as a folk-festival and also as a people’s festival? On the other hand, heavy rainfall in many parts of the country has resulted in countrymen suffering due to floods. Floods wreak havoc at various levels. I assure all the citizens affected by floods, that the Centre in tandem with State govts. is working at lightning pace to provide relief and succour. On television, we witness just one aspect of monsoon- floods everywhere, water logging and traffic jam! The other picture of monsoon- the overjoyed farmer, chirping birds, gurgling waterfalls and earth wrapped under a green cover, to witness this you will have to step out along with your family. Rains bring freshness and happiness with them, my heartiest wish is that the monsoon keep on bringing happiness to you and you all enjoy best of health.
My dear countrymen, where to begin ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and where to end it, is a difficult task! But there is a time limit! I’ll be back after a month’s wait and meet you again. You’ll have lots to tell me after a month’s interval and I’ll incorporate the information in the next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and let me remind my young friends that do not forget to participate in the quiz competition, do not forgo the opportunity to visit Sriharikota at any cost. Many thanks to you all. Namaskar.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. On the one hand, these days, our country is enjoying the feast of rains; on the other, every corner of the country is celebrating festivals and fairs. And this will go on till Diwali. Perhaps our ancestors intricately wove the annual seasonal cycle, the economy cycle and social & life systems in a way that ensured, that under no circumstances, dullness crept into society. We celebrated quite a few festivals in the days gone by. Yesterday, Krishna- Janma Mahotsav, the festival of the birth of Lord Krishna was celebrated throughout India. Can anyone even imagine the greatness of his personality, that, even after thousands of years, the festival comes along with renewed novelty, a new inspiration with fresh energy. And the noble being that he was; although millennia ago, yet it is relevant in providing solutions to problems as well as inspiration even today. Everyone can find solutions to present day problems from Shri Krishna’s life. Despite the tremendous might that he possessed, there were times when he would immerse himself in performing the RAAS; at other times he would be in the midst of cows and cowherds; sometimes indulging in sports & games; often playing the flute. A personality brimming with diverse talents and immense capability, yet devoted to empowering society and people, a persona that embodied pioneering accomplishments, a repository, a savior of people. What qualities should the virtue of friendship possess? Who can forget the incident of Sudama? And on the battlefield? Despite his myriad facets of greatness, assuming the role of a charioteer! Or running errands such as lifting a hillock, or at other times picking up leftover leaf plates! One feels a sense of newness in whatever he does. And that’s why today, as I converse with you, my attention is drawn towards two Mohans. One is the Sudarshan Chakra bearing Mohan and the other is the Charkha bearing Mohan. The Sudarshan Chakra bearing Mohan left the banks of the Yamuna for the sea beach of Gujarat, establishing himself in the city of Dwarika, while the Mohan born on the sea beach reached the banks of the Yamuna, breathing his last in Delhi. Sudarshan Chakra bearing Mohan, thousands of years ago, had amply used his wisdom, his sense of duty, his might, his worldview to avert war, to prevent conflict, a sign of the times then. And spinning-wheel bearing Mohan too chose a similar path, for the sake of Freedom, for preserving human values, for strengthening the basic elements of personality & character- for this he lent a certain hue to the Freedom struggle, a turn, that left the whole world awe struck, which it still remains today. The importance of selfless service, the importance of knowledge, or be it marching ahead smilingly, amidst the trials and tribulations of life, we can learn all these from Lord Krishna’s life’s message. And that is why Shri Krishna is known as Jagatguru – teacher to the world… ‘Krishnam Vande Jagadgurum’.
Today, as we discuss festivities, preparations are under way for a mega festival in India. Not just in India, it is a part of the discourse in the whole world. My dear countrymen, I’m referring to the 150th birth anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi. On the 2nd of October, 1869, at the beach of Porbandar, in Kirti Mandir as it is known today,… in that tiny abode, not just a person; an era was born, that charted the course of human history on an altogether new path, with trail blazing accomplishments on the way. One attribute has always been part & parcel of Mahatma Gandhi’s being – and that was his sense of service and the sense of duty towards it. If you view his life in entirety, you will note that he served communities in South Africa that were bearing the brunt of apartheid – in those times, it was, by no means a small feat. He served farmers in Champaran who were being discriminated against. He served millworkers who were being underpaid. He served the poor, the destitute, the weak and the hungry… he took it as life’s prime duty. There were many myths associated with leprosy then. In order to dispel them, he closely served people suffering from leprosy. He presented shining examples through the medium of service in his own life. He set examples of the sense of service for others to learn- not through words, but through deeds. Gandhiji shared an unbreakable bond with truth; he shared a similar unique bond with the spirit of service. Whoever, needed him, and wherever, Gandhiji was present to serve. He emphasized not only on the spirit of service, but also on the inner happiness it led to. Service as a virtue is meaningful when it is performed with a sense of joy-‘Seva Parmo Dharmah’. But simultaneously, deep inner joy, the essence of ‘Swantah Sukhaayah’ is inbuilt in the spirit of service. We can understand this from Bapu’s life. Mahatma Gandhi, of course, became the voice of innumerable Indians, in the larger backdrop of upholding human values & human dignity; in a way, he had become the voice of the world. For Mahatma Gandhi, the individual and society, human beings & humanity was everything. Whether it was the Phoenix Farm or the Tolstoy Farm in Africa, the Sabarmati Ashram or Wardha, he laid special emphasis on community mobilization in his own distinct way. I have been extremely fortunate to have been blessed with the opportunity to visit a number of significant places associated with revered Mahatma Gandhi and pay my homage. I can say that Gandhi emphasized on the spirit of collectiveness through a sense of service. Community service and community mobilization are virtues which we have to imbibe into our real lives. This would be the real way of paying true tributes to Mahatma Gandhi, the Karyanjali, the offering of deeds. Opportunities like these come often & we get associated with them. But should Gandhi 150 just come & go; will it be acceptable to us? No dear countrymen. All of us should introspect, dwell upon it, discuss it, bring it into collective discourse. Joining hands with more people of the society, from all strata, from all age groups; people from villages, cities, men, women, we should ask ourselves. As an individual, what can I add to the effort? What value addition could be there from my side? And being collective acquires its own strength. In all the programmes of Gandhi 150, let there be a sense of collectiveness, let there be a spirit of service. Why don’t we join hands and let the entire neighbourhood move together? If there is a football team, then the entire team. Of course we’ll play football, but along with it, we’ll pick up a deed to perform in conformity with one of Gandhi’s ideals of service. There could be a Ladies’ club! Routine tasks of a modern day Ladies’ club shall be taken up, but besides that, let all members of the Ladies’ club come together & perform an activity of service! We can do a lot. Collect old books, distribute them amongst the poor, spread the glow of knowledge. And I do believe that perhaps 130 crore countrymen are endowed with 130 crore ideas & there could be 130 crore endeavours. There is no limit- whatever that comes to your mind- but only with a genuine wish, a noble intention, within the realms of harmony, and with complete dedication… that too for the sake of enjoying that rare inner bliss, the core of ‘Swaantah Sukhaayah’.
My dear countrymen, a few months ago, I was in Dandi. In our Freedom struggle, the salt satyagrah at Dandi was an important turning point. There I’d inaugurated a state of the art museum dedicated to Mahatma Gandhi. I sincerely urge you to visit at least one place associated with Mahatma Gandhi in the days to come. It could be any site… such as Porbandar, Sabarmati Ashram, Champaran, the Ashram at Wardha or spots in Delhi related to Mahatma Gandhi. When you visit them, do share your photographs on social media so that others may be inspired. And do pen a couple of sentences or couplets to express your feelings. Emotions that emanate from the core of your heart will be more compelling than any great literary composition. And it is possible that in present times, from your viewpoint, the pen-picture of Gandhi sketched by you, may perhaps appear more relevant. In the times to come, many programmes, competitions & exhibitions have been planned. In this context I feel like sharing with you something very interesting. There is a famous art show called the Venice Biennale’, where people from the world over congregate. This time, in the India Pavilion at the Venice Biennale’, a very interesting exhibition based on memories of Gandhiji was organized. Of special interest were the Haripura Panels. You may remember that in the Haripura Congress Session in Gujarat, Subhash Chandra Bose being elected as President is recorded in history. These Art Panels have a beautiful past. Before the Haripura Session, in 1937-38, Mahatma Gandhi had invited the then Principal of Shantiniketan Kala Bhavan, Nandlal Bose. It was Gandhiji’s wish that the lifestyle of the people of India be depicted through the medium of art and this artwork may be exhibited during the session. This is the same Nandlal Bose whose artwork adorns our Constitution; lends to the Constitution a new, unique identity. The very commitment & reverence of Nandlal Bose have made him, along with the Constitution, immortal. Nandlal Bose toured villages around Haripura, concluding with a few works of art canvas, depicting glimpses of life in rural India. This invaluable artwork was a high point of discourse at Venice. Once again, along with greetings on Gandhiji’s 150th birth anniversary, I express my expectations from every Indian, of one resolve or the other. One should do something for the sake of the country, society or just for someone else. This will be a good, true & genuine Karyanjali to Bapu, a tribute through a good deed.
O glorious children of Mother India, you may remember that for the last few years, we have been running a countrywide campaign ‘Swachchata Hi Sewa’, ‘the quest for cleanliness is service’, around a couple of weeks before the 2nd of October. This time around it will commence on the 11th of September. During this period, all of us will move out of home, donating toil & sweat through ‘Shramdaan’, as a ‘Karyanjali’ to Mahatma Gandhi. Home or the neighbourhood lane, street circles, crossings, or drains, schools and colleges … we have to involve ourselves in a Mega campaign of ensuring cleanliness at public places. This time our emphasis must be on plastic. On 15th August, I had urged you from the Red Fort…the way one hundred & twenty five crore countrymen ran a campaign for cleanliness with utmost enthusiasm and energy, and toiled tirelessly towards freedom from open defecation; in a similar manner, we have to join hands in curbing ‘single use plastic’. This campaign has enthused people from all strata of society. Many of my merchant brothers & sisters have put up a placard at their establishments, boldly mentioning that customers ought to carry shopping bags with them. This will result in monetary savings, as well as one would be able to contribute towards protection of the environment. This year, on the 2nd of October, when we celebrate Bapu’s 150th birth anniversary, we shall not only dedicate to him an India that is Open Defecation Free, but also shall lay the foundation of a new revolution against plastic, by people themselves, throughout the country. I appeal to all strata of society, residents of every village, town & city, take it as a prayer with folded hands; let us celebrate Gandhi Jayanti this year as a mark of our plastic free Mother India. Let us celebrate 2nd October as a special day. Let us celebrate Mahatma Gandhi’s birth anniversary as a special ‘Shramdaan’ Festival, where everyone will donate one’s own labour. I urge all municipalities, municipal corporations, District Administration, Gram Panchayats, Government & non Governmental bodies, organizations; in fact each & every citizen to work towards ensuring adequate arrangement for collection & storage of plastic waste. I also appeal to the corporate sector to come out with ways & means proactively for appropriate disposal of all accumulated plastic. It can be recycled; it can be transformed into fuel. This way we can accomplish our task of ensuring safe disposal of plastic waste before this Diwali. All that is needed is a resolve. And for inspiration, there’s no need to look hither- tither; what can be a greater inspiration than Gandhi?
My dear countrymen, our Sanskrit Subhashit, epigrammatic verses are, in a way, gems of wisdom. We can derive from them whatever we need in life. These days I’m not in regular touch with the form… earlier it was frequent. Today I want to touch upon a very important point from a Sanskrit Subhashit. These lines were written centuries ago, but even today, carry great relevance. There is an excellent Subhashit that mentions –
“ पृथिव्यां त्रीणि रत्नानि जलमन्नं सुभाषितम् |
मूढैःपाषाणखण्डेषु रत्नसंज्ञा प्रदीयते” ||
That is, water, grain and subhashit are the three gems found on earth. Imprudent people call stones as gems. In our culture much glory has been ascribed to food. We have even converted the knowledge about food into a science. Balanced and nutritious food is essential for all of us, more so for women and the new-born, since these two categories are the foundation of the future of our society. Under the ‘Poshan Abhiyaan’ campaign, nutrition made available with the help of modern scientific methods is being converted into a mass movement all over the country. People are fighting a battle against malnutrition in innovative and interesting ways.
Once, an interesting fact was brought to my notice. The ‘Mutthi Bhar Dhaanya’ initiative has turned into a big movement in Nashik. In this novel scheme, during the harvest period, Anganwadi workers collect a handful of rice grain from the people. This grain is used to make piping hot food for children and women. In this way, the person contributing the handful of grain transmutes into a conscientious civil social worker. In the process, he gets himself dedicated to this cause and becomes a soldier of that movement. All of us have heard about the ‘Ann Praashan Sanskar’, the first solid morsel ritual for toddlers in families all across India. This ritual is performed when the toddler starts feeding on solid food for the first time; solid and not liquid food!
In 2010, Gujarat embarked upon planning to provide kids complimentary food on the occasion of ‘Ann Praashan Sanskar’ so that this initiative spreads awareness among the masses. This is a great initiative that can be adopted anywhere. In many states, people run meal campaigns on certain dates. If the family celebrates a birthday, certain auspicious day or observe an in- memoriam day, then the family members with self-prepared nutritious and delicious food, go to the Anganwadis and also to the schools and these family members themselves serve the children and feed them. They not only share their happiness but in the process receive happiness magnified manifold! There is a wonderful confluence of a sense of service and satisfaction.
My Friends, there are many little things that can be employed in our country’s effective fight against malnutrition. Today, due to lack of awareness, both poor and affluent families are affected by malnutrition. The month of September will be celebrated as ‘Poshan Abhiyaan’ across the country. You must get connected with it, get information about this initiative, add some new facet to ‘Poshan Abhiyaan’ by contributing to it. If you manage to save a few people from malnutrition, it would mean that we can bring the country out of the circle of malnutrition.
Srishti Ji thank you for your phone call and just like you KK Pandey ji from Sohna, Haryana, and Aishwarya Sharma from Surat and many other people have expressed a desire to know more about the ‘Man vs. Wild’ television episode aired on Discovery Channel. This time when I was thinking about ‘Mann ki Baat’, I was sure that a lot of questions would crop up about this subject and that’s what exactly happened. In the last few weeks wherever I went and met people, ‘Man vs. Wild’ gets a mention! With this one episode, I have not only formed a connect with the youth around the world but I had never thought that I would find a certain place in young hearts in this way. I had never thought that the youth of our country and the world pay attention to diverse things.
I had never thought that there would be an opportunity in my life to touch the hearts of young people around the world. And look what happens? Just last week I went to Bhutan. I have seen that whenever I have had the opportunity to go as Prime Minister, and of course credit also goes to International Yoga Day, the situation now is that wherever I go in the world or interact with someone, people invariably spend close to 5-7 minutes asking questions on yoga.
There must hardly be a major world leader who has not discussed yoga with me and this has been my experience all over the world. But these days I’m experiencing something new. Whoever I meet or wherever there is a chance to talk, the focus is on Wildlife, discussions about the environment, the Tiger, the Asiatic Lion, evolution etc. and I am amazed how interested people are in nature.
The Discovery Channel plans to broadcast this programme in 165 countries in their respective languages. Today, when there is a global churning of thought on environment, Global Warming, and Climate Change, I do hope that in such circumstances, this episode of Discovery Channel will help greatly in familiarizing the world with the message from India, the traditions of India and the empathy for nature in India’s trail of glorious traditions.
It is my firm belief that people want to know the steps taken in the direction of climate justice and clean environment in India. But there is another interesting thing, some people ask me one thing albeit with some hesitation -Modi ji, you were speaking in Hindi and Bear Grylls does not know Hindi, so how did you carry on such a fast conversation between the two of you? Was this episode edited later? How many times did the shooting happen for this episode and how it happened? They ask with great curiosity.
Now, there is no secret in this. Many people have this question in their minds, so I will unravel this secret. Well, in a way it is no secret at all! The reality is that technology was used extensively in my conversation with Bear Grylls. Whenever I spoke immediately there was a simultaneous translation into English or simultaneous interpretation and Bear Grylls had a small cordless instrument in his ear. So I used to speak in Hindi but he heard it in English and because of that the communication became very easy and this is an amazing aspect about technology.
After the broadcast of this show, a large number of people have been discussing about Jim Corbett National Park. You must also visit sites associated with nature and wild life and animals. As I have said before, and I emphasize, that you must visit the north-east in your lifetime. What a glorious abundance of nature exists there. You will be left wonderstruck! Your horizon will expand. On 15th August, I urged all of you from the ramparts of the Red Fort to visit at least 15 places within a span of the next 3 years, 15 places within India and for 100% tourism, visit these 15 sites! Witness and observe. Do take the family and spend some time there.
Our country is full of diversity and this wide range of diversity will also inculcate variations within you as a teacher. Your life will be enriched. Your thinking will expand. And trust me, there are places within India from where you will come back with renewed energy, enthusiasm, zeal and inspiration, and maybe you will feel like returning to certain places again and again; your family too would feel the same.
My dear countrymen, the concern and care for the environment in India seems natural. Last month I had the privilege of releasing the tiger census in the country. Do you know how many tigers there are in India? The tiger population in India is 2967, two thousand nine hundred sixty seven.
A few years ago, we were with great difficulty at a figure half of what we have at present. The Tiger summit took place in 2010 at St. Petersburg, Russia. At this summit, a resolution was taken expressing concern about the dwindling tiger population in the world. It was resolved to double the number of tigers worldwide by 2022. But this is New India, where we accomplish goals in the quickest time possible. We doubled our tiger numbers in 2019 itself. Not only the tiger population in India was doubled, but the number of protected areas and community reserves has also increased.
At the time I was releasing the data on tigers, I also remembered the Asiatic lion of the Gir in Gujarat. I had the charge of the Chief Minister of Gujrat at a period of time when the habitat of lions in the forests of Gir was shrinking. Their number was decreasing. We took several innovative steps, one after the other in the Gir. In 2007, it was decided to deploy female guards. There were improvements in the infrastructure to increase tourism. Whenever we talk about nature and wildlife, we only talk about conservation. But, we now have to move beyond conservation and think about compassion. Our scriptures have provided great guidance with respect to this subject. Our scriptures have said centuries ago: –
निर्वनो बध्यते व्याघ्रो, निर्व्याघ्रं छिद्यते वनम |
तस्माद् व्याघ्रो वनं रक्षेत्, वनं व्याघ्रं न पालयेत् ||
That is, if there are no forests, tigers are forced to venture into the human habitat and are killed, and if there are no tigers in the forest, then man cuts the forest and destroys it, so in fact the tiger protects the forest and not that the forest protects the tiger – our forefathers explained this great truth in a befitting manner. Therefore, we need to not only conserve our forests, flora and fauna, but also create an environment wherein they can flourish properly.
My dear countrymen, who can forget the historic speech of Swami Vivekananda delivered on September 11, 1893. This young monk of India, who shook the conscience of the human race of the entire world, imparted onto this world a glorious identity of India. The enslaved India which was gazed at by the world in a much distorted manner was forced to change its way of looking at India due to the words of a great man like Swami Vivekananda on September 11, 1893. Come, let us look anew at India which Swami Vivekananda had seen and let us put in practice the inherent strength of India realized by Swami Vivekananda. We possess everything within us, let us proceed with confidence.
My dear countrymen, all of you will remember that the 29th of August is celebrated as ‘National Sports Day’. On this occasion, we are going to launch the ‘Fit India Movement’ across the country. We have to keep ourselves fit and the nation has to be made fit. It will be a very interesting campaign for everyone – children, the elderly, the young and women and it will be your own movement. But today I am not going to reveal its specifics; you must wait for 29thAugust! I will tell you about ‘Fit India Movement’ in detail on 29thAugust and I am not going to forget connecting you with the movement because I want to see you fit! I want to make you aware about fitness and for a fit India, we should unite to set some goals for the country.
My dear countrymen, I will be waiting for your participation on 29th August in ‘Fit India Movement’, in ‘Poshan Abhiyaan’ during the month of September and especially in the ‘Swachhata Abhiyan’ beginning from the 11th of September to the 2nd of October. And 2nd October as a day has been totally dedicated to riddance from plastic. All of us with all our might must try to get rid of plastics from our home and everywhere outside our houses. And I know that all these campaigns will make a big splash on social media. Come, let us proceed with a new zeal, new resolve and renewed strength.
My dear countrymen, this is all that this episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has in store for you today. I shall be meeting you later. I will wait for your say and your suggestions. Come, let us all march together to make the India which was dreamt of by our freedom fighters and realize Gandhi’s dreams – ‘Swantah: Sukhayah’. Let us proceed, enjoying our inner bliss, expressing our spirit of service.
Many many Thanks.
Namaskar
My dear countrymen, Namaskar, Friends, in today’s episode of Mann Ki Baat, I shall also talk about a great personality of the country, cherished by all Indians with respect and affection from the core of their hearts. There must be hardly an Indian citizen who does not show deep regard for her, does not revere her. She is elder to most of us and has been a witness to myriad phases, different eras the country has passed through. We address her as “DIDI”, elder sister…. Lata Didi. She turns ninety this 28th of September. Before leaving on the foreign tour, I was blessed with an opportunity to converse with her on the phone. This chat was akin to a younger brother speaking to his elder sister affectionately. I usually refrain from sharing such personal conversations; but today, I want you to listen to the tete a tete; listen to Lata Didi. Listen to it for yourself how Lata Didi is earnestly concerned and eager about everything concerning the country. Her satisfaction and reassurance too, lies in the progress being made by India; the India on the path of change; the India that is gaining newer heights.
My dear countrymen, with the advent of Navaratri today, the air is bound to be full of new hopes, new energy, newer zest and newer resolves, once again. After all, it’s the festival season. The ensuing weeks shall be witness to the sparkle of festivals throughout the country. All of us shall celebrate the Navaratri Mahotsava, Garba, Durga Puja, Dussehra, Diwali, Bhaiya Dooj, Chhath Puja…. in fact innumerable festivals. Heartiest greetings to all of you for these festivals to come. During festivals, families come together. Homes will be filled with joy! But… you must have felt this… there are many people around us who remain deprived of these celebrations. And this is what is termed as “Chirag Tale Andhera” darkness just beneath the lamp! Perhaps this adage is not just a set of words; for us, it is an order a philosophical thought, or an inspiration. Just think about it; there are some homes, bathed in shimmering lights; on the other hand, just close by, there are some homes mired in darkness. There are homes where sweetmeats are left to rot; there are homes where children yearn for a sweet; at places almirahs run out of space to store more clothes; elsewhere, people have to slog to earn a decent covering for their bodies. So, is this not the darkness, just beneath the lamp? Indeed it is. The true joy radiating out of festivals is only when the darkness subsides and dissipates and a radiant glow emerges. Let us distribute joy, where there is a paucity of it… let it come naturally to us. On the one hand, when we experience the ‘Delivery In’ of sweetmeats, apparel, gifts and so on, let us think for a moment on the process of ‘Delivery Out’. At least in our homes, items that are in excess and thus, not required anymore, could be allocated for ‘Delivery Out’. In many cities, many NGOs run by young friends have formed Startups for this endeavor. They collect clothes, sweets, food from homes, look for the needy and hand them over discreetly. Can we, this time, during the festival season, dispel some of the darkness beneath the lamp with due awareness and resolve? The smiles thus accrued on the faces of numerous underprivileged families will more than double your joy during festivals… your faces will be lit up with a glow that will brighten your Diwali immensely.
My dear brothers and sisters, Laxmi, the goddess of wealth, makes an entry into each and every household in the form of fortune and prosperity. Of course, Laxmi should be welcomed in the traditional way. Can we, this time, introduce a novelty in welcoming her? In our culture, daughters are considered Laxmi, since they are harbinger of fortune and prosperity. Can we, this time around in society, organize programmes to felicitate daughters in villages, towns and cities? It could be in the form of a public function. There must be numerous daughters amongst us who, through there perseverance, diligence and talent have brought glory to their families, society and the country. This Diwali, can we arrange programmes to honor the Laxmi of India? If you look around, you’ll find many daughters and daughters-in-law who are performing extraordinarily. Some must be engaged in teaching underprivileged children, others could be occupied in spreading awareness in the field of sanitation and health, while many could be doing society a service by working as Doctor and Engineers. Or striving for justice to someone by working as Lawyer!
Our society must recognize such daughters, honor them and feel proud of them. Programmes to felicitate them should be held throughout the country. We could do something more; we could highlight the achievements of these daughters by sharing their achievements on social media, using the hashtag # BHARAT KI LAXMI. The way we jointly ran a mega campaign “Selfie with daughter”, which spread globally. Similarly, this time, let us do a campaign BHARAT KI LAXMI. Encouraging the Laxmi of Bharat amounts to strengthening the paths of prosperity for the country and her citizens.
My dear countrymen, as I have mentioned earlier, a great advantage of Mann Ki Baat is that, I’m blessed with the opportunity to converse with a lot of people, known or unknown, directly or indirectly.
A few days ago, Aleena Taayang, a student from far off Arunachal has written an interesting letter to me. And the contents are… Let me read out the letter to you.
Respected Mr. Prime Minister, my name is Aleena Taayang. I hail from Roing, Arunachal Pradesh. On my exam result this time, some people asked me if I had read the book Exam Warriors! I replied in the negative. But on returning, I purchased the book and read it more than twice. My experience after that has been very good. I felt, had I read the book before my exams, I would have benefited a great deal. I liked quite a few aspects of this book, but I noticed that it contains may mantras for students, but for parents and teachers, this book does not have much. I wish;if you are thinking anew on a new edition, do include a few mantras for parents and teachers and of course new content.
See… even my young friends bear this trust that whatever they ask the Pradhan Sevak, the principal servant of the country to do; it will be done.
My young student friends, first of all, I thank you for writing to me. Thank you for reading Exam Warriors more than twice and special thanks for pointing out shortcomings in the book. At the same time, my little friend has entrusted me with a task, in fact there are orders for me. I shall certainly comply with your directions. As you have told me, I shall positively try to write something for parents as well as teachers, as and when I get the time to pen a new edition. But I urge all of you… can you be of help to me? It is about experiences in your daily lives. I call upon all students, teachers and parents to come up with your experiences and suggestions on aspects of stress free exams. I shall duly go through them, study them. I’ll give it due thought and whatever comes across as apt, I shall try and incorporate that in my own words. And quite possibly, if the suggestions are sufficiently large in number, it will lend certitude to the idea of a new edition. So, I shall eagerly wait for your thoughts to flow. Once again, I express my gratitude to our little friend, student Aleena Taayang from Arunachal.
My dear countrymen, you update yourselves with the busy schedule of the Prime Minister of the country through newspapers and television, you even discuss the engagements. But, I hope you are aware that I am just as common a being as you are. Being an ordinary citizen, whatever affects you has the same effect on me, since I’m just one amongst you. Just see how on the one hand, victory in the U.S. open was discussed; on the other, runner up Daniil Medvedev’s speech was equally doing the rounds in public discourse, especially on social media. Hence I too heard the speech and watched the match. The sheer simplicity and maturity displayed by the 23 year old Daniil Medvedev touched everyone. It surely stirred me. Moments before this speech, he had suffered defeat at the hands of Tennis legend Rafael Nadal, 19 times grand slam winner. An event such as this would have pushed anyone towards remorse and despair; in the case of Medvedev, there was no sign of the slightest pallor on his countenance. Rather, his expression lit up the faces of those watching him with meaningful smiles. He won hearts with his humility and simplicity; the epitome of the spirit of sportsmanship in the truest sense that he is, in letter and spirit. Spectators welcomed his reflections with warmth and fervor. He also touched upon Nadal being the inspiring force in Tennis for millions of young people, adding how difficult it was to face him in the game. The way Medvedev heaped praise on his opponent after a defeat in a fierce duel makes him a living example of the true essence of the spirit of sportsmanship. Of course, on the other hand champion Nadal too showered glowing praise on Daniil’s game. The display of the indomitable ardour of the defeated and the sheer humility of the victorious in the same frame was a sight to behold. If you haven’t heard Medvedev’s speech yet, I shall urge you, especially young friends to watch this video. It holds much for people across the age and class spectra to see and learn. These are moments that go way beyond winning and losing, where victory and defeat cease to be. It is life that is victory…. This has been beautifully articulated in our scriptures. The wisdom of our ancestors is truly praiseworthy. Our ancient texts observe:
विद्या विनय उपेता हरति
न चेतांसि कस्य मनुजस्य
मणि कांचन संयोग:
जनयति लोकस्य लोचन आनन्दम
meaning, when ability and humility amalgamate in a person, whose heart will he not be able to win over? As a matter of fact, this young player has won the hearts of people across the globe.
My dear countrymen and especially my young friends, what I am going to tell you now is directly for your benefit. Discourses and debates will continue, the support and opposition will continue, but, if some things are checked before they proliferate, then there is a huge benefit. Things that spawn and spread a lot are very difficult to stop at later stages. But, if we become aware at an early stage and put a stop to it, then a lot can be saved. Continuing in the same vein, I feel, today, that I should definitely have a talk with my young friends.
We all know that addiction to tobacco is very harmful for health and it becomes very difficult to quit this addiction. People who consume tobacco are vulnerable to high risk diseases like cancer, diabetes, blood pressure etc. Everyone knows that. Tobacco intoxication occurs due to the nicotine present in it. Brain development is hampered by its consumption during adolescence. But, today, I want to have a discourse with you on a new topic. You must be knowing that, recently the e-cigarette got banned in India. An e-cigarette is a type of electronic device unlike a typical cigarette. In an e-cigarette, the heating of nicotine-containing fluids creates a type of chemical smoke and this is the pathway through which nicotine is consumed. While we all understand the dangers of common cigarettes, a misconception has been generated about e-cigarettes.
The myth that has been spread is that e-cigarettes pose no danger. Like the conventional cigarette, it does not spread odour as fragrant chemicals are added to it. We have seen around us, that, even if the father in any house is a chain smoker, still he tries to stop the rest of the household from smoking and wants his children not to fall prey to the habit of cigarettes or bidis. His effort is that no family member should take to smoking. He knows that smoking or tobacco causes great damage to the body. There is no confusion about the dangers posed by a cigarette. It only causes harm and this even its seller too knows. The smoker also knows this fact and so do people around. But the case of e-cigarettes is quite different. There is little awareness among people about e-cigarette. They are also completely unaware of its danger and for this reason sometimes e-cigarettes sneak into the house out of sheer curiosity. And Kids at times pretending to be showing some magical trick, blow smoke in the presence of Peer Company or their parents, without lighting a cigarette or striking a match to light it! And as if a magic show is going on, the family members respond with applause! There is no awareness! There is no knowledge that once teenagers or our youth get caught in its clutches, then, slowly, they become hooked and fall prey to this noxious addiction.
And our real wealth -the youth become condemned to tread on the path of waste, quite unaware! In fact, many harmful chemicals are added to e-cigarettes, which have a deleterious effect on health. You are aware of the fact that when someone smokes around us, we come to know about it through its odour. Even if there is a packet of cigarettes in someone’s pocket, the smell can be detected. However, this is not the case with an e-cigarette and many teenagers and young people, unknowingly and sometimes proudly displaying an e-cigarette as a fashion statement, keep it in their books, in their offices, in their pockets, sometimes hold it in their hands and thus fall prey to it. The younger generation is the future of our country. The e-cigarette has been banned so that this new form of intoxication does not destroy our demographically young country. It does not trample the dreams of a family and waste the lives of our children. This scourge and this obnoxious habit should not become rooted in our society.
I urge all of you to quit the addiction to tobacco and do not harbour any misconceptions about e-cigarettes. Come, let us all build a healthy India.
Oh Yes! Do you still remember Fit India? Fit India does not mean that if we go to the gym for two hours every morning and evening, it will suffice! All these addictions have to be avoided to be a part of Fit India. I am sure you will not misconstrue whatever I’ve said, but rather happily accept my counsel; I will definitely like it.
My dear brothers and sisters, it is a matter of great providence that our India has been the birthplace and work-place of extraordinary denizens, who spent all their lives, not for themselves, but for the good of the society.
Our Mother India, our country is a bountiful land! Many gems of human beings took birth here. India has not only been the birthplace of such extraordinary people, but also the land of their karma. And these are the people who have spent themselves in service of others. One such illustrious Indian is being honoured in Vatican City on 13th October. It is a matter of pride for every Indian that, on the coming 13thOctober, His Holiness Pope Francis will declare Sister MariamThresia a saint. Sister MariamThresia, in her short lifespan of 50 years, worked for the good of humanity becoming a noble example for the entire world. Whatever task Sister Mariam Thresia undertook and accomplished, she did so with utmost dedication and devotion.She rendered service in the fields of education and social service. She had built many schools, hostels and orphanages, and throughout her life, remained devoted to this cause.
She founded the Congregation of the Sisters of the Holy Family which is still continuing on the path of her life’s philosophy and mission. I once again pay heartfelt tributes to Sister MariamThresia and congratulate the citizens of India, and especially our Christian brothers and sisters, for this achievement.
My dear countrymen, it is a matter of pride not only for India but for the entire world today, while we are celebrating ‘Gandhi 150’, our 130 crore countrymen have pledged to be rid from the menace of Single Use Plastic. In view of the kind of lead that India has taken towards environmental protection, today the countries of the entire world are looking towards India as a model example. I am confident that you will all be a part of the campaign for liberation from the menace of Single Use Plastic on 2ndOctober. In India, citizens are contributing in this campaign in their own way. But, a young man from our country has initiated a very unique campaign.
My attention was drawn towards his work, so I talked to him on the phone and tried to understand the new experiment being attempted by him. It could be that this attempt of his may work for other people of our country. Mr. Ripudaman Belviji is making a unique effort by attempting plogging! When I first encountered the term Plogging, it was novel even to me. Perhaps this word is in usage in certain measures in foreign lands. But, in India, Ripudaman Belviji has promoted it to a great extent. Let’s talk to him.
PM’S PHONE CALL WITH RIPUDAMAN BELVI
That is why you are worthy of praise. Ripudaman ji, I felt nice talking to you. You have designed this entire programme in a very innovative manner, in a way that it will be liked, especially by young people. Heartiest congratulation to you. And friends this time on the anniversary of revered Bapu, the Ministry of Sports too is organizing a ‘Fit India Plogging Run’. On the 2nd of October, plogging for two kilometers; and it will be held across the country. We heard through the experiences of Ripudaman Ji, how this programme should be organised; what it should consist of. What we have to do in this campaign that commences on 2nd of October is that while we jog for 2 kilometers; and on the way, collect all kinds of plastic waste. Through endeavor, we shall not only pay better attention to our health; we shall also take a step towards ensuring protection for Mother Earth. This campaign is resulting in raising awareness levels in people; as far as sanitation and cleanliness, along with fitness levels. I do believe that a single step towards freedom from single use plastic taken by 130 crore countrymen will give India a lead by a 130 crore steps. Ripudaman ji, once again, many thanks to you. And to your team, and your imaginative, innovative bent of mind, heartiest congratulations from my side. Thank you.
My dear countrymen, groundwork for 2nd October is going on all over the country and also the world over, but we want to transmute ‘Gandhi 150’ as a task on the path of our duty. We want to move forward devoting our lives in the interest of the nation. I would like to remind you one thing in advance. Although in the next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I shall dwell upon it in detail, still today I am telling this in advance so that you get time to prepare. You do remember that, 31stOctober is the birth anniversary of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel and that ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’ is our common dream; hence for that reason, every year on 31 October, we run for fostering unison in the country as ‘Run for Unity’, all over the nation. We have to run for the unity of the country on that day in in large numbers; elders, everyone, schools, colleges, all of us have to run for unity in lakhs of villages across the span of Hindustan. So, better start preparing from this instant onwards! I shall talk about it in detail later, but right now we have time on our hands; some people can begin their practice, whereas some can chalk out a plan.
My dear countrymen, you will remember, that on 15 August, I had in my address said from the ramparts of Red Fort that by 2022, you should visit 15 tourist destinations in India. At least 15 places and if possible, make a program to stay over there for an overnight, two-night stay. You should observe, understand and experience India. We have so much diversity. And when holidays come in the shape of Diwali and allied festivals, people do travel and that’s why I urge you to visit any 15 such places in India.
My dear countrymen, the 27th of September, two days prior to today, was celebrated as World Tourism Day and you will be happy to know that certain reputed tourism agencies of the world which rank standards of travel & tourism have shown that India has displayed a lot of improvement in the Travel & Tourism Competitive Index. And all this has been possible due to your cooperation and especially because understanding the importance of tourism has increased. The Swachhata Abhiyan also has a big role to play in all of this. And you will be delighted to know that today our rank is thirty four on this index whereas five years ago we were ranked 65th, which in a way is a big jump. If we tried all that harder, then by the 75th year of our independence, we would have carved a place for ourselves amidst the major tourist destinations of the world.
My dear countrymen, once again, I wish you all the best for various festivals that will be celebrated in the oncoming season in India, which is filled with diversity! Yes! Also, please see to it that during the celebration of Diwali, firecrackers do not lead to incidents of fire or loss of a life. Whatever precautions or preventive care is to be taken, should be taken during Diwali. Happiness should co-exist with joy, and of course there must also be enthusiasm and our festivals do indeed bring the aroma of collectiveness, and also the rituals connected with communal harmony. Symbiotic living provides us with renewed vigour and the festive season is the symbol of the culmination of that renewed vigour. Come! Together brimming with enthusiasm, renewed dreams and resolutions we should celebrate. Once again here’s wishing many felicitations to you all. Thank you.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. On the pious festival of Deepawali, greetings to all of you. We are familiar with the lines of the Shlok-
Shubham Karoti Kalyanam, Aarogyam Dhansampadaa.
Shatrubudhdhi Vinashaay, Deepajyoti Namostute!!
What a fine, purposeful message! The shlok says: It is Light that ushers in joy, health and prosperity into our lives, dispelling negative thought, bringing in positivity. I salute the divine flame respectfully. To make this Diwali memorable, what could be a better way than an attempt to let light spread its radiance, encouraging positivity, with a prayer to quell the feeling of animosity? These days Diwali is celebrated across many countries. And notably, it is not limited to Indian communities; even governments, citizens and social organisations wholeheartedly celebrate Diwali with gaiety and fervour. In a way, they nurture a microcosm of India at their respective places.
Friends, festival tourism has its own exciting attractions. Our India, the country of festivals, possesses limitless possibilities in the realm of festival tourism. It must be our endeavour to ensure that we should welcomingly include people of other states, other countries when we celebrate Holi, Diwali, Onam, Pongal or Bihu, spreading their true spirit. Here, every state, every region is replete with distinct festivals, generating a lot of interest in people from other countries. Hence, the Indian Diaspora has a significant role to play in promoting festival tourism in India .
My dear countrymen, in the previous episode of Mann Ki Baat, we had decided to do something different this Diwali. I had urged all of you to celebrate India’s Nari-Shakti, the power and achievement of women, thereby felicitating the Lakshmi of India. And within no time, there followed a slew of innumerable inspirational stories on social media. Kodipaka Ramesh from Warangal has written on Namo App-“My mother is my strength. In 1990, when my father expired, the responsibility to raise five sons fell on her shoulders. Today, all five brothers are doing well in their respective professions. My mother is God to me. She is the Lakshmi of India in every sense of the term.” Ramesh ji , respectful greetings to your mother. Geetika Swami, who is active on Twitter, says that for her, Major Khushbu Kanwar, daughter of a bus conductor, who has led an all women contingent of Assam Rifles, is the Lakshmi of India. For Kavita Tiwari, her daughter is the Lakshmi of India, her strength. She is proud of her daughter’s excellent painting ability. She has also secured a good rank in the CLAT exam. Whereas Megha Jain has mentioned that a 92 year old woman has been offering free drinking water to passengers at Gwalior Railway Station. Megha Ji is truly inspired by the humility and compassion of this Lakshmi of India. Many such stories have been shared by people. Do read them, get inspired and share similar instances. I respectfully salute all the Lakshmis of India.
My dear countrymen, the well known 17th century poetess Sanchi Honnamma has penned a poem in Kannada that embodies the same thought, the same words pertaining to every Lakshmi of India that we referred to. One feels the foundation of the idea was laid in the 17th century itself. You will notice the beauty of word, sentiment and thought in this poem in Kannada:
(Penninda permegondanu himavantanu.
Penninda broohu perchidanu
Penninda janakaraayanu jasuvalendanu)
Which means, Himwant, Lord Mount attained fame on account of daughter Parvati, Rishi Brighu on account of his daughter Lakshmi and King Janak because of daughter Sita. Our daughters are our pride…their prodigious virtuosity cradles our social fabric, ensuring its bright future.
My dear countrymen, the 12th of November, 2019 is the day when the 550th Prakashotsav of Guru Nanak dev ji will be celebrated across the world. The luminescence of Guru Nanak Dev ji’s influence can be felt not only in India but around the world. Many of our Sikh brothers and sisters settled in other countries committedly follow Guru Nanak dev ji’s ideals. I can never forget my visits to Gurudwaras in Vancouver and Tehran. There is much about Guru Nanak Dev ji that I can share with you, but it will require many an episode of Mann ki Baat. He accorded the highest significance to the spirit of service. Guru Nank Dev ji firmly believed that any service done selflessly was beyond evaluation. He stood firm against social ills such as untouchability. Sri Guru Nanak Dev ji radiated his message to all corners of the world. He was the widest travelled of those times. And wherever he went he won hearts through his straightforwardness, humility and simplicity. Guru Nanak Ji undertook many significant spiritual journeys called ‘Udaasi’. Carrying the message of harmony and equality, he travelled north, south, east and west, meeting people, saints and sages. It is said that the revered Assamese saint Shankar Dev too was inspired by him. He also travelled to the holy land of Haridwar. There is a holy place in Kashi named ‘Gurubagh Gurudwara’. It is believed that Guru Nanak Dev Ji had halted there. He also went to Buddhist holy sites such as Rajgir and Gaya. His journeys to the south took him to Sri Lanka, as well. During his Yatra to Bidar, Karnataka, he devised a solution for water woes the place was grappling with. Gurunanak Jhira Sahib is a famous place in Bidar dedicated to him, cherishing reminiscences of him. During one Udaasi, Gurunanak Dev Ji travelled north to Kashmir and neighboring areas. This forged a strong bond between Sikh followers and Kashmir. Guru Nanak Dev Ji also went to Tibet where people accorded him the status of a Guru. He is revered in Uzbekistan too, which he had visited. During one Udaasi, he widely travelled to Islamic countries including Saudi Arabia, Iraq and Afghanistan. He secured a revered place in the hearts of millions who followed his messages with complete devotion, a practice that continues even in the present times. Just a few days ago, Ambassadors of approximately eighty-five countries went to Amritsar from Delhi. There in the Golden Temple itself, they undertook a holy Darshan, commemorating the 550th Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak Devji. Besides Darshan, all these Ambassadors had the opportunity to know more about Sikh traditions and culture. Following that, many Ambassadors shared those photos on social media, writing about their glorious experiences.It’s my devout wish to imbibe Guru Nanak Dev Ji’s thoughts and ideals into our lives; may we be all the more inspired to make it happen.
My dear brothers and sisters, I am sure all of you remember the significance of the 31st of October. This day marks the birth anniversary of the Iron Man of India, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, the unifying force in bonding us as a Nation; our Hero.On the one hand Sardar Patel, possessed the rare quality of uniting people; on the other, he was able to strike a balance with people who were not in ideological agreement with him. Sardar Patel used to observe even the minutest of things in-depth; assessing and evaluating them simultaneously.
He was a ‘Man of Detail’ in the true sense of the term. Along with that, he was also adept at organising skills. Chalking out plans and devising strategies was his core forte’. When we read and hear about Sardar Saheb’s style of working, we come to know of the sheer magnitude of the meticulousness in his planning. In 1921, in the Congress Session in Ahmedabad, thousands of delegates from across the country were slated to participate. Sardar Patel was entrusted with overlooking all the arrangements. He utilized this opportunity in improving the city’s water supply network. He ensured that not a single person would face a problem on account of water. Not just that, he was also concerned about the safety and security of the delegates’ shoes and baggage. To ensure that, what he did will surprise you.He contacted farmers and urged them to craft khadi bags. These were made and sold to the delegates. They carried the bags with their shoes inside, free from any tension of the footwear getting stolen. On the other hand, it led to a major rise in the sale of khadi. Our country will always be indebted to Sardar Patel for his steller role in the Constituent Assembly. He strove to ensure enshrinement of fundamental rights that obliterated any possibility of discrimination on the basis of caste and community.
Friends, all of us know that as India’s first home minister, Sardar Patel undertook the colossal, historic task of integrating Princely states. Scrutinizing the minutest of events closely was his rare quality. On the one hand, he concentrated on Hyderabad, Junagarh and other States; on the other, he was watching far flung Lakshadweep intently. Actually, when we refer to Sardar Patel’s endeavour, his role in the unification of just a few notable States is discussed. He played a far more significant role, when it came to a small region such as Lakshadweep too. Lakshadweep is one of the most beautiful landscapes in India. Soon after Partition in 1947, our neighbour had cast an eye on Lakshadweep; a ship bearing their flag was sent there. When Sardar Patel was informed of this, he wasted no time in initiating stern action. He urged the Mudaliar brothers, Arcot Ramaswamy Mudaliar and Arcot Laxman Swamy Mudaliar to immediately undertake a mission with people of Travancore to Lakshadweep and take the lead in unfurling the Tricolour there. Following his orders, the Tricolour was promptly unfurled there and the nefarious dreams of the neighbour of annexing Lakshadweep were decimated within no time. After this incident, Sardar Patel asked the Mudaliar brothers to personally ensure all assistance for development of Lakshadweep. Today, Lakshadweep is contributing significantly in India’s progress. It is an attractive tourist destination too. I hope you get the opportunity to visit the picturesque islands and its pristine beaches.
My dear countrymen, the 31st of October, 2018, is the day when the ‘Statue of Unity’,in memory of Sardar Saheb was dedicated to the nation and the world. It is the tallest statue in the world. It is double in height compared to the ‘Statue of Liberty’ located in the US. The distinction of having the world’s highest statue fills every Indian with pride; the head of every Indian is held high. You will be happy to note that in a year, more than 26 lakh tourists visited the ‘Statue of Unity’. This means that an average of eight and a half thousand people witnessed the grandeur of the ‘Statue of Unity’ every day. The reverence and devotion for Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel in their hearts was reflected in the form of homage paid to him. Besides, at present,it houses many centres of attraction such as Cactus Garden, Butterfly Garden, Jungle Safari, and Children’s Nutrition Park, Ekta Nursery, which are all constantly evolving and providing a fillip to the local economy. Local people are not only getting innovative opportunities of employment but for the convenience of visiting tourists, many villagers are providing facilities like home stays. And these hosts are being professionally trained in the technique of running a home stay. The locals have now started the cultivation of Dragon fruit and I am sure that it will soon become a major source of livelihood for the people there.
Friends, for our nation and the constituent states, as well as for the tourism industry, this ‘Statue of Unity’ can be a subject of research. We are all witness to the fact that how within a year a place developed as a world famous tourism destination. People arrive there from the country and abroad. And one after the other, ancillary services like transport, lodging, guides and eco-friendly services are getting inducted by themselves. A large economy is developing and people are generating facilities as per the requirement of the tourists. The government is also playing its role. Friends, which Indian will not be imbued with pride for the fact that recently, Time magazine has included the ‘Statue of Unity’in its list of 100 important tourist destinations around the world. Of course I hope, that all of you will devote some of your precious time to visit the ‘Statue of Unity’. But my appeal is, that every Indian who takes out time to travel must visit at least 15 Tourist Destinations of India with family and experience a night stay at whichever place you go to; this still remains my appeal.
Friends, as you know that 31st October every year since 2014 has been celebrated as ‘National Unity Day’. This day imparts the message to protect the unity, integrity and security of our country at any cost. On 31st October, this year too ‘Run for Unity’ is being organized in consonance with previous years. It will include people from all walks of life, from every segment of our society. ‘Run for Unity’ is a symbol of unison, that the nation being united, is moving in one direction and collectively aims for- One goal! Ek Bharat, Shreshth Bharat!
The last five years have witnessed – not only in Delhi but in hundreds of cities of India, union territories, state capitals, district centres, even in small cities belonging to tier two or tier three categories, innumerable men, women, be they the city folk, village folk, children, the youth, the elderly, divyang, all are participating in‘Run for Unity’in large numbers. Anyway, at present, people have adopted and found a passion for the marathon. ‘Run for Unity’ is also one such unique provision. Running is beneficial for the mind, body and soul. During ‘Run for Unity’not only do we have to run, but in doing so the spirit of FIT India is also reflected. We also find ourselves connected with Ek Bharat- Shrestha Bharat! And so, not just our body, but our mind and value system get integrated with ushering unity in India to take India to loftier heights! And so, in whichever city you reside, you can find out about the ‘Run for Unity’ schedule. A portal namely runforunity.gov.in has also been launched for dissemination of information about this event. In this portal, information has been provided about the venues where ‘Run for Unity’ is to be organized across the country. I hope you will all run on October 31st –not only for the unity of India, but also for your physical fitness!
My dear countrymen, Sardar Patel integrated the nation with the thread of unison. This mantra of unity is like a sacrament in our life and in a country like ours filled with diversities, we should continue to strengthen this mantra of unison on all paths, at every bend, and at every pit-stop. My dear countrymen, our nation has always been very proactive and alert in strengthening unity and communal harmony in the country. If we look around us, we will find many examples of individuals who have been working ceaselessly to foster communal harmony. But sometimes it so happens, that the efforts of the society and its contribution, get wiped from our collective memory.
Friends, I remember when the Allahabad High Court gave its verdict on Ram Janmabhoomi in September 2010. You could jog your memory a bit and reflect about the atmosphere then. Various kinds of people took to the arena! Various interest groups were playing games to take advantage of that situation in their own way! The kind of language that was spoken in order to generate tension in the atmosphere! There was also an attempt to instill shrillness in the tone of different speakers. Some of the loudmouths and the braggarts had the sole intention of hogging the spotlight at that time. And we all know what kind of irresponsible talk was floating around! But this scenario had continued for five days, or seven days, or ten days, but, the delivery of the court’s decision generated a pleasant and surprising change of mood in the country.
On the one hand, the machinations went on to generate tension for week or two, but, when the decision was taken on Ram Janmabhoomi, the government, political parties, social organizations, civil society, representatives of all sects and saints gave restrained and balanced statements. There were attempts to reduce the tension in the sociopolitical environment. But I remember that day vividly. And whenever I do that, I get happy that the dignity of the judiciary was very proudly honoured and no allowance for any heated discourse or tension was made anywhere. These incidents should always be remembered as they impart us a lot of strength. That day, that moment, instills in us all a sense of duty. It is an example of how the voice of unison can bestow strength upon our country.
My dear countrymen, on 31st October, on the same day… the former Prime Minister of our country Smt Indira ji was assasinated. It was a traumatic moment for our country. Today, I pay homage to her too.
My dear countrymen, today, if one story that rings from home to home, and rings far and wide,is heard from north to south, east to west and from every corner of India, then that IS the story of cleanliness and sanitation. Every person, every family, every village wants to narrate their pleasant experiences in relation to the cleanliness mission, because behind this effort of cleanliness is the effort of 125 crore Indians.
The outcome also belongs to 125 crore Indians. But therein lies a pleasant and interesting experience too. I heard it and I think, I will share it with you too. Just imagine the highest battlefield in the world, where the temperature drops from zero to 50-60 degrees minus. Oxygen in the air is also at a miniscule level. Living in the midst of such adverse conditions and challenges is not less than any display of valour. In such a difficult situation, our brave heart soldiers are not only protecting the borders of the country, but are also running a ‘Swacch Siachen’ campaign in that arena.
On behalf of our countrymen, I commend the Indian Army for this amazing commitment. I also express my gratitude. It is so cold there that its near impossible for anything to decompose. In such a situation, the segregation and management of garbage is a very important task in itself. In this scenario, to remove 130 tons and more of garbage from the glacier and its surrounding area’s fragile eco-system is a great service! It is an eco-system which is home to rare species like the snow leopard and rare animals like ibex and brown bears. We all know that Siachen as a glacier is a source of rivers and clean water. Therefore, running a cleanliness campaign here means ensuring clean water for those who live in low-lying areas and also use the water of rivers like Nubra and Shyok.
My dear countrymen, festivals are occasions that awaken a new consciousness in our lives. And especially during Diwali, it is customary in every family to buy something new, get something from the market in smaller or larger quantity. I had once said that we should try to buy local products. There is no need to go to the tehsil if our need is met in our village. If it is found in Tehsil, then there is no need to go to the district. The more we try to buy our local things; the ‘Gandhi 150’ will become a great event in itself. And I keep insisting that we must buy some handloom products made by our weavers, our khadi artisans.
Even during this Diwali, you must have bought quite a few or a lot of things before Diwali. But there are many people who think that if they go shopping after Diwali then may be they could get a good bargain. So there will be many people, who still have their shopping left. Hence along with the best of wishes on Deepawali, I would urge you to come forward and become a patron of local things and buy local. And witness for ourselves, how we can play an important role in making Mahatma Gandhi’s dream come alive. I once again wish you all the very best on this auspicious festival of Diwali. In Diwali we burst fire crackers of all kinds! But, sometimes fire is caused due to carelessness. An injury can also occur. I urge all of you to take utmost care of yourself and also celebrate the festival with great enthusiasm. I extend many felicitations to you.
Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen, welcome to ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Today’s episode begins with the young people of the young nation; their enthusiasm, patriotism and the sense of selfless service that envelops them. As you know, every year, the fourth Sunday of the month of November is celebrated as NCC Day. Generally speaking, our young generation is more likely to remember ‘Friendship Day’, without fail. But there are many people who, equally keep in mind NCC Day. So let’s talk about NCC today. I too will get an opportunity to refresh a few memories. At the outset on the occasion of NCC, Day, I extend my best wishes to all NCC Cadets, both former & present. More so, since I too have been a cadet once; I consider myself to be a cadet even, today. All of us know that India’s National Cadet Corps, NCC is one of the largest uniformed youth organizations of the world.
It is a Tri-services organization comprising the Army, the Navy and the Air Force. NCC means, cultivating the qualities of Leadership, patriotism, selfless service discipline & hard work as an integral part of one’s character; the thrilling journey of imbibing them into one’s habits. To discuss more about this journey, let’s call up a few young people, who have made a name for themselves in the NCC. Let’s talk to them.
PM: Friends, how are you?
Tarannum Khan : Jai Hind, Hon’ble Prime Minister
PM: Jai Hind
Tarannum Khan: Sir, this is Junior under Officer Tarannum Khan
PM: Tarannum, where are you from?
Tarannum Khan: I belong to Delhi sir.
PM: Okay. So how many years have you been with the NCC?
How were your experiences?
Tarannum Khan: Sir I was enrolled in the NCC in 2017; these
three years have been the best years of my life.
PM: Great… it’s nice to hear that
Tarannum Khan: Sir, I would like to share my best experience during an ‘Ek Bharat – Shreshth Bharat’ Camp. This camp was held in August and had children from the North Eastern Region, NER too. We stayed with those cadets for 10 days. We learnt elements from their way of life, their lifestyle. We were introduced to their language. We learnt a lot about their tradition & culture. Such as ‘Vaizomi’ means ‘Hello,’ how are you? Similarly, during our Cultural Nite they taught us their dance. It is called Tehra. And they taught me wearing the ‘Mekhla’ attire. Believe me, our Delhi group was looking pretty, as well as our friends from Nagaland. We also took them around on a tour of Delhi; we showed them the National war Memorial & India Gate too. There we treated them to Delhi’s snack ‘Chaat’ & also the Bhelpuri. But they found it a bit hot & spicy. They told us they generally like having a soup, along with a few boiled vegetables. So they didn’t like it much. But, other than that, we clicked a lot of pictures with them and shared many experiences.
PM: Are you still in touch with them?
Tarannum Khan: Yes Sir. We still contact each other.
PM: Great. That’s good
Tarannum Khan: Yes sir
PM: Who else is there with you?
Hari G.V: Jai Hind Sir
PM: Jai Hind
Hari G.V: This is senior under Officer Sri Hari G.V. I belong to
Bengaluru, Karnataka.
PM:And where do you study?
Hari G.V: Kristujayanti College, Bengaluru Sir.
PM: Okay, in Bengaluru?
Hari G.V: Yes sir.
PM: So, tell me
Hari G.V: Sir, I came back from the youth Exchange Programme,
Singapore just yesterday.
PM: That’s great
Hari G.V: Yes sir
PM: So you got an opportunity to go there!
Hari G.V: Yes sir
PM: How was your experience in Singapore?
Hari G.V: Six countries had come together, there, comprising United Kingdom, United States of America, Singapore, Brunei, Hong Kong & Nepal. Here we learnt an exchange on combat lessons & International Military exercises. Our performance there was one of its kind. It was here that we learnt water sports and adventure activities. Sir, the Indian team won the Water Polo tournament. And in the cultural segment, we were adjudged as overall performers. They admired our Drill & word of command, sir.
PM: Hari, how many of you were there?
Hari G.V: 20 of us Sir. We were 10 boys & 10 girls.
PM: Okay. Were they from different States of India?
Hari G.V: Yes sir.
PM: Fine. Your friends must be eager to listen to your experiences. I liked it. Who else is there with you?
Vinole Kiso: Jai Hind Sir
PM: Jai Hind
Vinole Kiso: This is senior under Officer Vinole Kiso. I belong to the North Eastern Region, Nagaland State sir.
PM: Yes Vinole. Tell us about your experience.
Vinole Kiso: Sir, I’m studying B.A. History (Honours) at St. Joseph’s College, Jakhama (Autonomous). I joined NCC in the year 2017. It was the greatest & the best decision of my life Sir.
PM: With NCC, where all did you get a chance to travel to?
Vinole Kiso: Sir NCC taught me a lot, and gave me many opportunities.
I would love to share one of my experiences. This year in June I attended a camp. It was the combined Annual Training Camp held at Sazolie College, Kohima. 400 cadets attended the Camp.
PM: So, all your friends in Nagaland must be eager to know about the various places in India, you visited, what all you saw! Do you share all your experiences with them?
Vinole Kisu: Yes sir.
PM: Who else is there with you?
Akhil: Jai Hind Sir, this is Junior under Officer Akhil.
PM: Yes Akhil, tell me
Akhil: I belong to Rohtak, Haryana Sir.
PM: Okay
Akhil: I am doing Physics Honours from Dayal Singh College, Delhi University.
PM: That’s good.
Akhil: Sir, the best thing I like about the NCC is discipline.
PM: Great!
Akhil: It has made me a more responsible citizen Sir. I love the drill and the uniform of a NCC cadet.
Prime Minister: How many camps you have had a chance to attend? What places did you get the opportunity to visit?
Akhil: Sir, I have done 3 camps. I recently was a part of the attachment camp at Indian Military Academy, Dehradun.
Prime Minister: How long was that camp?
Akhil: Sir, it was was a 13-day camp.
Prime Minister: Good
Akhil: Sir, there I witnessed from close quarters how officers are inducted into the Indian Army … and after that my resolve to become an officer in the Indian Army has become even firmer.
Prime Minister:Great …
Akhil: And Sir, I also participated in Republic Day Parade! It was a matter of great pride for me and my family.
Prime Minister: Well done…
Akhil: My mother was much happier than me, sir. When We used to get up at 2 in the morning to go and practice on Rajpath, the enthusiasm in us was worth seeing! People from the rest of the contingents also encouraged us quite a lot. It was while marching on Rajpath, we had goosebumps!
Prime Minister: All right I got a chance to have a word with all four of you, and that too on NCC Day. It is matter of joy for me because I also had the good fortune to be an NCC Cadet in my village school as a child, so I know that this discipline, this uniform, enhances the confidence level, all these things I had a chance to experience as an NCC Cadet during childhood.
Vinole:Mr. Prime Minister I too have a question.
Prime Minister: Sure,ask!
Vinole: That you have also been a part of NCC
Prime Minister: Who? Is that Vinole speaking ?
Vinole: yes sir, yes sir
Prime Minister: Yes, Vinole please tell me.
Vinole: Did you ever get punishment?
Prime Minister: (laughing) That means that you people get
punishment?
Vinole: Yes sir.
Prime Minister: No! It never happened because I was in a way quite disciplined! But yes once a misunderstanding crept up. While we were at camp I climbed a tree. At first sight it seemed that I had broken some rule but later everyone came to realize that a bird was stuck in a kite string. So I climbed the tree to save it. So, at first it seemed that there would be some disciplinary action against me, but later I garnered a lot of praise. So I had a different sort of experience in this manner!
Tarannum Khan: Sir, it was great to know that.
Prime Minister: Thank you.
Taranum Khan: This is Taranum speaking.
Prime Minister: Yes Tarannum, tell me…
Tarannum Khan: If you permit sir, I would like to ask you a question?
Prime Minister: Yes, please tell me.
Tarannum Khan: Sir, in your messages you have told us that every
Indian citizen should visit to 15 places in 3 years. Would you like to tell us what places we should visit? And what was the one place that made you feel good rather best?
Prime Minister: Well I have always had a certain fondness for the Himalayas.
Tarannum Khan: Yes …
Prime Minister: But even then I will urge the people of India that if you love nature,
Tarannum Khan: Yes Sir.
Prime Minister: Dense forests, waterfalls, If you want to see a unique type of environment, then I tell everyone to go to the North East.
Tarannum Khan: Yes sir.
Prime Minister: I always tell this fact and because of this I hope Tourism will also increase a lot in the North East; the economy will also benefit a lot and the dream of ‘Ek bharat! Shrestha Bharat!’ will also get strengthened there.
Tarannum Khan: Yes sir.
Prime Minister: But there are lot of places everywhere in India which are worth visiting, worth studying, worth imbibing.
Shri Hari G.V. : Prime Minister sir, I am Shri Hari speaking!
Prime Minister: Yes Hari Please tell me.
Shri Hari G.V. : I want to know from you;had you not been a politician, what would you have been?
Prime Minister: Now this is a very difficult question because every child goes through multiple phases in life. Sometimes one wants to become this, sometimes one wants to become that, but it is true that I never had the desire to go into politics, nor ever thought about it, but now that I have reached here,I keep thinking howI can work for the welfare of the country with all my heart, and the mere thought that ‘Where would I have been if I hadn’t been here’ should never enter my thought. Now, wherever I am, I should live life to the fullest and I should wholeheartedly work ceaselessly for my country, not worrying whether it is day, or night. I have now dedicated myself for this purpose only.
Akhil: Prime Minister …
Prime Minister: Yes …
Akhil: If you are so busy during the day, then I’m curious to know whether you get time to watchTV, movies or read books?
Prime Minister: By the way, I was always fond of reading books since it is not a time bound activity. I have never had any interest in watching films, nor do I watch TV with the same intent. I watch very little. Earlier I used to watch Discovery channel for the sake of curiosity. And I used to read books.But these days I am unable to read and due to Google, the habit of reading has deteriorated because if you want to seek a reference, then you immediately find a shortcut. So like everyone certain habits of mine have also been spoiled. Ok,friends, I loved talking to you all very much and through you I wish the very best to all the NCC cadets. Thanks a lot my friends, Thank You!
All NCC cadets: Thank you very much Sir, Thank You!
Prime Minister: Thank you, Thank You.
All NCC cadets: Jai Hind Sir
Prime Minister: Jai Hind
All NCC cadets: Jai Hind Sir
Prime Minister: Jai Hind, Jai Hind
My dear countrymen, we should never forget that Armed Forces Flag Day is celebrated on the 7thof December. This is the day when we pay homage to our brave soldiers, for their valour, their sacrifices; we also contribute.Only a sense of respect does not suffice. Participation is also necessary and every citizen should come forward on the 7thof December and everyone should possess the flag of the Armed Forces on that day; everyone should also contribute. Come. On this occasion, let us express our gratitude for the indomitable courage, valour and spirit of dedication of our Armed Forces and remember the brave soldiers.
My dear countrymen, by now you must be familiar with the Fit India Movement. CBSE has taken a commendable initiative of introducing the concept of ‘Fit India week’. Schools can celebrate ‘Fit India week’ anytime during the month of December. There are many types of events to be organized with regards to the aspect of fitness. This includes quiz, essays, articles, paintings, traditional and local sports, yogasana, dance,sports and games competitions. Students as well as their teachers and parents can also participate in the Fit India Week. But don’t forget that Fit India doesn’t mean just exercising the mind or making fitness plans on paper or merely looking at fitness apps on the laptop or computer or on a mobile phone. Not at allyou’ve to sweat it out. The food habits have to change. The habit of maximising focus activity should be inculcated.
I appeal to the school boards and management of all the states of the country that Fit India Week should be celebrated in every school, in the month of December. This will inculcate the habit of fitness in our daily routine. In the Fit India Movement, schedules have been drawn for ranking schools in accordance with fitness. The schools that achieve this ranking will also be able to use the ‘Fit India’ logo and flag. The Schools can declare themselves as Fit by visiting the Fit India portal. Fit India three star and Fit India five star ratings will also be given. I appeal that all schools should enroll in the Fit India ranking system and Fit India should become innate to our temperament. That it become a mass movement and bring awareness is what we must strive for!
My dear countrymen, our country is so large…so full of diversity. It is so ancient… that so many things just slip our mind…and that’s quite natural. But I do wish to share something with you. I happened to glance at a comment on the MyGov portal a few days ago. Mr Ramesh Sharma from Nagaon in Assam has written this comment. He writes, that a festival is being celebrated on Brahmaputra river. It’s called Brahmaputra Pushkar. This festival was held between 4th and 16th November, and people had come from all corners of the country to take part in this Brahmaputra Pushkar. Weren’t you also surprised to hear this? See, that’s the thing, this is such an important festival, and our forefathers have fashioned it in a way that once you hear the full details, you will be even more surprised. But unfortunately, the extent to which this should have been publicized, the extent to which this information should have been disseminated to every corner of the country, it isn’t done. And it is also true, that this event in a way signifies the concept of one country-one message. And that we are all ONE. It fills us with that feeling, it energises us.
First of all let me thank Shri Ramesh for having shared his thoughts with the entire country through the Man Ki Baat forum. You have also agonized about the fact that such an important event is not adequately publicized, not discussed as much as it should be. I can empathise with you.
Not many people in the country know about this. Well, if someone would have given it the moniker “International River Festival”, or used some other highfalutin lingo to reference it, well then, it might have resulted in some sort of discussion around this topic in the country.
My dear countrymen, Pushkaram, Pushkaraalu, Pushkaraha. – have you ever heard these terms? Do you know what these are? Let me tell you. These are the different names by which festivals organized on 12 different rivers across the country are called. One river every year…that means it would recur on that particular river after 12 years…and this festival is held sequentially every year in 12 different rivers spread across the country …and it lasts for 12 long days. Just like the Kumbh festival, this too, encourages the concept of national unity. And echoes the philosophy of “Ek Bharat-ShreshTh Bharat” (One India Best India)…Pushkaram is a festival in which the greatness of the river, the glory of the river, the importance of the river in our lives…all these are brought forth naturally.
Our forefathers put a lot of emphasis on nature, on environment, on water, on land, on forests.
They understood the importance of rivers, and tried to inculcate a positive mindset towards rivers in the society. They constantly strove to conflate the river with the cultural stream, the stream of tradition, and with the society. And the interesting thing is that, not only did it bring the society closer to the rivers, it also brought people closer to each other. Last year the Pushkaram was held on the TaamirabaraNi river in Tamil Nadu. This year it was held on the Brahmaputra river. Next year it will be held in Telangana, Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka on the Tungabhadra river.
In a way, you can travel to all these 12 places, as part of a tourist circuit as well. Here I would like to appreciate the warmth and hospitality of the people of Assam, who acted as wonderful hosts for pilgrims from all over the country. The organizers also paid great attention to cleanliness. They ensured plastic free zones. Bio-toilets were also provided at many places. I hope that this ancient festival, that has helped create a positive mindset towards rivers among us, will continue to bring our future generations also closer to the rivers. Nature, environment, water – all these things should not only be part of our tourism – they should also be a part of our lives.
My dear countrymen, young Shweta writes in from Madhya Pradesh on the NaMo app. And she says, sir, I am studying in Class 9, and there is still a year to go before I sit for my board examinations. But I regularly listen to your conversations with students and exam warriors. The reason I am writing to you is that you have not yet shared with us the scheduled date for your next interaction on examinations. Please schedule it at the earliest. If possible, please schedule it in January.
Friends, this is something I really like about the “Man Ki Baat” programme. The love and sense of entitlement with which my young friends complain to me, instruct me or give suggestions to me – I really am gladdened by them. Shveta ji, you have raised this issue at an opportune time. Exams are round the corner…so like every other year, we need to discuss examinations. And you are right, that this program needs to be scheduled a bit earlier.
After the last exam interaction, many people have written in with suggestions to make it more effective. Some have even complained that it was held too close to the date of the exam. And Shweta is right that I should conduct it in the month of January. The HRD ministry and the MyGov team are jointly working on it. It will be my endeavour to hold this discussion on exams in the beginning or middle of January. Student friends across the country have two opportunities. One, they can become part of this through their respective schools. Alternatively, they can be part of the program being conducted here in Delhi. Students participating in the Delhi event will be selected through the MyGov portal. Friends, we have to banish the fear of examinations collectively. I want to see my young friends smiling during examinations, their parents should be stress-free, teachers should be assured. We have been constantly striving to achieve this objective – through the Man ki baat program, through the “Discussions on Examinations” Townhall or through the Exam Warriors book. Students, parents and teachers from across the country have taken this mission forward, and I am grateful to all of them. We will all celebrate the upcoming program on Examination Discussion together – I cordially invite you all.
Friends, in the last edition of Man Ki Baat, we had discussed the 2010 Allahabad High Court Judgment on the Ayodhya issue. And I have referred to how we had maintained peace and harmony back then. Whether it was before the verdict, or after the verdict. This time too, when the Supreme Court pronounced its judgment on 9th November, 130 crore Indians once again proved, that for them, national interest is supreme. The values of peace, unity and goodwill are paramount in our country. When the verdict on Ram Mandir was pronounced, the entire country embraced it with open arms. They accepted the verdict with ease and with peace. Today, through the Man Ki Baat program, I would like to appreciate and thank my countrymen. I am particularly grateful to them for the patience, restraint and maturity shown by them. On the one hand, a protracted legal battle has finally come to an end, on the other hand, the respect for the judiciary has grown in the country. In the truest sense, this verdict has also proved to be a milestone for the judiciary in our country. After this historic verdict of the Supreme Court, the country has moved ahead on a new path, with a new resolve…full of new hopes and aspirations. It is my hope and wish that New India imbibes this feeling and forges ahead in a spirit of peace, unity and goodwill. It is the wish of each one of us.
My dear countrymen, our civilization, culture and languages preach the message of unity in diversity to the entire world. 130 crore Indians belong to a country about which it is said, “The taste of the water changes after every couple of kilometers, the lingo changes every few miles. Hundreds of languages have blossomed and flourished in our country for centuries. At the same time, we are also concerned about the possible extinction of these languages and dialects. Recently I read a story from Dhaarchulaa in UttaraakhanD. That gave me a lot of satisfaction. After reading that story, I got to know how people are coming forward to promote their languages. In innovative ways…I was attracted to this story from Dhaarchulaa since I too have stayed there while travelling. It has Nepal on one side, Kali Ganga on the other side – so it’s natural that my attention was drawn to this story from Dhaarchulaa. There are many people of the Rang community who inhabit Dhaarchulaa in PithauraagaRh. They converse among one another in the Ranglo language. They are quite saddened by the fact that the number of people who speak this language is rapidly dwindling. And then, one fine day, they got together and resolved to save their language. And in no time, people from the Rang community joined in. You will be amazed to hear that there are only a handful of people in this community. Roughly, their number is estimated to be around ten thousand. But in order to save the Ranglo language, everyone contributed their mite. Be it an 84 year old elderly man Diwan Singh, or a 22 year old youth Vaishali Garbyaal. Be it a professor or a trader, everyone contributed – in whatever way they could. In this mission, ample use was also made of the social media. Many WhatsApp groups were formed. Hundreds of people were connected to this mission through these groups. This language does not have a script. It finds usage only in the spoken form. So, people started posting stories, poems and songs. They started correcting each other’s language (errors). So, in a way WhatsApp became a kind of classroom, where everyone was a student and a teacher at the same time. There is an effort to conserve the Ranglo language in all this ?? Different kinds of programs are being held, magazines are being published, and social institutions are also assisting in this effort.
Friends, another important thing to note is that the United Nations has declared 2019 as the “International Year of Indigenous Languages”. That means, efforts are being made to conserve those languages which are on the verge of extinction. Hundred and fifty years ago, the father of modern Hindi Bharatendu Harishchandra had also said
“The progress of one’s language, is the source of one’s overall progress
All progress is meaningless if one’s mother tongue is neglected”
That means, no progress is possible without the knowledge of one’s mother tongue. This initiative of the Rang community, thus, is sure to be showing the path to the rest of the world. If you too, have been inspired by this story, then start using your language or dialect from today. Inspire the society and your family to do so.
Towards the end of the 19th century, Mahakavi (Great Poet) Subramanya Bharati had said, and he had said in Tamil.
मुप्पदु कोडी मुगमुडैयाळ- Mupppadu kODi mugam uDai yaaL
उयिर् मोइम्बुर ओंद्दुडैयाळ- uyir moim bura onDruDaiyaaL
इवळ सेप्पु मोळी पधिनेट्टूडैयाळ ivaL seppu mozhi padineTTuDaiyaaL
एनिर्सिन्दनैओंद्दुडैयाळ enil sindanai onDruDaiyaaL
And he said it back then, I am referring to the second half of the 19th century. And he said that Mother India has 30 crore faces, but one body. She speaks 18 languages, but thinks as one.
My dear countrymen, there are times when mundane things in life enrich us with a great message. Just the other day, I was reading a story in the media on scuba divers. This is a story that can be inspiring for all Indians. One day, these scuba divers, who impart training in Vishakhapattanam, were obstructed by plastic bottles and pouches on their way back from sea on Mangamaripetta beach. While cleaning the litter, they found the matter grave. They were appalled at the way our sea is being littered with garbage. For the last many days, these divers go up to 100 mts. away from the coast; dive deep and take out the garbage lying around. And I am told that just within 13 days ie 2 weeks, they have removed more than 4000kg of plastic waste from the sea. This small beginning by the divers is being transformed into a big mission.
They are being helped by local people now. Local fishermen have also started to help them by all means.
Pondering over, taking inspiration from these scuba divers, if we too, take a pledge to rid our surroundings of plastic waste, “Plastic Free India” can become a new example for the whole world.
My dear countrymen, the 26th of November is just two days away.. This day is special for the whole country. This is especially important for our republic since we celebrate this day as Constitution Day. This year it is even more special as we are completing 70 years of the adoption of the constitution. This occasion will be marked by a special programme in Parliament followed by many other events organised across the country throughout the year. Let us pay our respects and gratitude to all the members of the constituent assembly. Our constitution guards the rights and dignity of every citizen which has been ensured owing to the farsightedness of the architects of our constitution.
I pray that the ‘Constitution Day’ reinforces our obligation towards upholding the constitutional ideals and values thus contributing to nation building. After all, this was the dream of the makers of our constitution.
My dear countrymen, winter is knocking on the door. We can feel the pink of the season all around us. Parts of the Himalaya have begun to don sheets of snow, but this is the season of the ‘fit India movement’ too. You, your family, your friends, your friend circle, your companions, should not miss the opportunity. Use the weather to your advantage to take the ‘Fit India Movement ‘forward.
Many good wishes. Many thanks.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. The moment to bid adieu to 2019 is round the corner knocking at our doors! In a matter of just 3 days, not only will 2019 wave good bye to us; we shall usher our selves into a new year and a new decade; the third decade of the 21st century! I extend my heartiest greetings to all countrymen on the arrival of year 2020. One thing is certain about the decade to come. And that is, it will witness the active contribution of those who were born in the 21st century, in the country’s progress; these are people who are growing up, understanding the significant issues pertaining to this century. The young people such as these, are known by myriad terms. For some they are millennials; others call them generation Z or Gen Zee too; and broadly speaking, one thing that has captured the collective psyche is that this is the ‘Social Media Generation’. All of us experience that this generation is extremely talented. It thrives on the dream to do something new, something different. It has its own set of opinions. And the best part is; especially in the case of India; according to me, they appreciate the system. Not just that, they prefer to follow the system. And in the event of the system not responding properly, they get restless and even courageously question the system itself! I consider this attribute as a virtue. One can even say with certitude here, that the country’s youth detests anarchy of any sort. They despise any element of lack of governance and instability; abhorring any shades of nepotism, casteism, favouritism or gender discrimination. There are times when we see them at an airport or a cinema theatre; if someone tries to break a queue, the first to react vociferously are these young people. And we have noticed; if such an incident takes place, the youth present around make a video of it on their mobile phones, which goes viral within no time! And the culprit instantly realizes the consequence. Thus, our new generation is an embodiment, a reflection of a new system, a new order, a new age, a new thought. Today, India eagerly awaits this generation expectantly. These are the very people who have to elevate the country to greater heights. Swami Vivekanand ji had observed, “My faith is in the younger generation, the modern generation; out of them will come my workers”. Referring to the youth, he had remarked, “The value of youth can neither be ascertained, nor described!” Youth is the most valuable phase, of one’s life. Your life & future entirely depends on the way your utilized your youth. According to Vivekanand ji, young people are the one’s full of energy and dynamism, possessing the power to usher in change. I am of the firm belief that for India, this decade will be, not only about development & progress of the youth; it will also prove to be about the country’s progress, harnessing their collective might. This generation will play a major role in modernizing India; I feel it beyond any doubt. On the birth anniversary of Vivekanand on the 12th of January, on the occasion of National Youth Day, every young person should give a thought to this responsibility, taking on resolve or the other for this decade.
My dear countrymen, many of you must be aware of the rock in Kanyakumari where Swami Vivekanand ji had entered into the meditative state, the spiritual ‘Antardhyan’. That very rock Memorial is completing 50 years of existence. For the last five decades, it has earned a place of pride for India. Kanyakumari exudes a special attraction, nationally as well as for the world. For anyone seeking to experience spiritual consciousness filled with national pride, this has become a centre of pilgrimage, a temple of faith. Swamiji’s Memorial has inspiringly instilled a sense of national pride amongst people, irrespective of their sect, age or class. It has shown the way to realize & follow the mantra, ‘In service of the poorest of the poor’. Whoever visits the place, naturally experiences a surge of inner energy, a sense of positivity; the resolve to contribute something to the country.
Recently, in connection with the 50 years, our Honourable President paid a visit to the Rock Memorial. And it’s a matter of joy that our Vice President too visited the Desert Festival held in Rann of Kutch, Gujarat for the inauguration. When our Hon’ble President & Vice President are visiting such important tourist destinations in India, it is bound to inspire our countrymen. I urge you too to travel & visit these places.
My dear countrymen, all of us study in myriad colleges, universities & schools. But after completing studies, Alumni Meets are joyous occasions. At any Alumni Meet, members come together, sharing youthful memories, going back 10, 20 or even 25 years. At times, such meets turn out to be a special attraction that gets noticed. And it is also important for it to catch the attention of our countrymen. Actually, an alumni meet is an occasion for old friends to come together, refresh memories; these are happy moments indeed. Alongside, if this union comprises a shared purpose, a resolve, an emotional connect, it lends additional hues to the event. You must have seen alumni groups at times, contributing something or the other to their schools. Some arrange for systems for computerization, some organize a better library, others go for revamping drinking water facilities or new rooms. Some have gone to the extent of facilitating sports complexes. One thing or the other! It gives them inner joy to do something for the place that shaped their life…. everyone feels so and should feel so.And people do come forward for the same. But today, I wish to present before you a special occasion. Just recently, I came across on the media, a story on the Bhairavganj Health Centre in the West Champaran district of Bihar. It was such a nice feeling that I could not stop myself from sharing it with you. At this Bhairavganj Health Centre, thousands of people from neighbouring villages converged for a free health check up. Of course, you will not be surprised at that! You may say, “So what? What is new in that? People must have thronged there, as usual!” Not at all. A lot about it was new. This was not a government programme, nor was it a government initiative. This was a step taken as part of an Alumni Meet organized by former students of the local K.R. High School. And they named it ‘Sankalp 95’. ‘Sankalp 95’ means, the resolve undertaken by the 1995 Batch of that High School. Actually, students of this batch held an Alumni Meet and thought of doing something different. Under this, the former students resolved to do something for society and decided to shoulder responsibility in the area of Public Health Awareness. Under the aegis of ‘Sankalp Ninety Five’, Government Medical College of Bettiah and many hospitals also joined in this campaign. And after that, an entire movement centred on public health got started. Be it free medical tests, distribution of free medicines, or, just spreading awareness, ‘Sankalp Ninety Five’ has become a shining beacon for everyone. We often say that when every citizen of the country takes a step ahead, our nation moves 130 crore steps forward! And when such things are witnessed first-hand in the society, then everyone gets elated, derives satisfaction and is infused with motivation to do something in life! On one hand, in Bettiah in Bihar, a group of alumni took up the task of health care delivery, on the other, some women of Phulpur in Uttar Pradesh have inspired the entire region with their tenacity.
These women have proved that if a resolution is taken with the true spirit of solidarity, nothing can stop conditions changing for the better. Till some time ago, these women of Phulpur were hampered by financial constraints and poverty, but, they had the resolve to do something for their families and society. These women aligned withthe women self-help group of Kadipur, joined in learning the skill of making slippers, and thus not only managed to pluck the thorn of helplessness from their feet, but by becoming self-reliant, also became the support of their families. With the help of ‘Gramin Ajivika Mission,’a slipper manufacturing plant has also been established here, where slippers are being made with the help of modern machines.
I especially congratulate the local police and their families, who encouraged these women entrepreneurs by purchasing slippers for themselves and their families made by these women. Today, due to the resolve of these women, not only the financial condition of their families have been fortified; their standard of living has also improved. Whenever I hear about the police personnel of Phulpur or their families, you will also recollect, that I had urged from the ramparts of Red Fort on the 15th of August, requesting the countrymen to buy local produce preferably. Today once again I suggest, can we promote locally made products? Can we prioritize them in our shopping? Can we link local products with our status and pride? Can we become a medium to bring prosperity to our fellow countrymen with this spirit?
Friends, Mahatma Gandhi viewed this spirit of Swadeshi as a lamp illuminating the lives of millions as well as bringing prosperity in the lives of the poorest of the poor. A hundred years ago, Gandhiji started a huge public movement to promote Indian products as one of its objectives. This was the path shown by Gandhi ji towards self reliance. The India that we breathe freely in was liberated by millions of worthy sons and daughters who underwent numerous tortures and hardships; many even sacrificing their lives. We attained freedom owing to sacrifice and penance of innumerable people; a freedom that we are fully enjoying. We hardly know the names of those countless beings who made the supreme sacrifice for the country, who went through untold hardships for Her. Of some we know; others will always stay anonymous. They all made sacrifices, firmly carrying that dream in their hearts….that of a free India…for the sake of a prosperous, flourishing and free India.
My dear countrymen, can we pledge, that by 2022, when we achieve 75 years of independence we insist and remain steadfast at least, for about two-three years on buying local products? Products made in India, made by the hands of our citizens, carrying the fragrance of the sweat of our countrymen, can’t we resolve to buy such things? I do not advocate this for a long time, just till 2022, till the completion of 75 years of independence. And this work should not be carried out by government, instead of this young people should step forward at various places, form small organizations, motivate people, explain and decide –“Come, we will buy only local, products, emphasize on local products, carrying the fragrance of the sweat of our countrymen – That will be the exultant moment of my free India; let these be the dreams with which we proceed!
My dear countrymen, it is very important for all of us, that the citizens of our country become self-reliant and live their lives with dignity. I would like to discuss one such initiative that has caught my attention and that is the ‘Himayat Programme’of Jammu- Kashmir and Ladakh. The ‘Himayat Programme’ is actually associated with skill development and employment. In this programme, teenagers and youth from 15 to 35 years of age, those denizens of Jammu and Kashmir whose studies, for some reason, could not be completed, who had to leave school and college midstream are associated.
My dear countrymen, it would gladden you that under the aegis of this programme, during the last two years, eighteen thousand youths, have been trained in seventy seven different trades. Out of these, around five thousand people are working somewhere or the other, and many have moved towards self-employment. The success stories of lives which have changed under the aegis of the ‘Himayat Programme’, truly touch the heart!
Parveen Fatima has become a Supervisor-cum-Coordinator following a promotion in a Garment Unit in Tirupur, Tamil Nadu. Until a year ago, she was living in a small village in Kargil. At present, her life has undergone a major change, she has become confident – she has become self-reliant and has also brought an opportunity for prosperity for her entire family! Like Parveen Fatima, the ‘HimayatProgramme’ has changed the fate of other daughters and residents of Leh-Ladakh region and all of them are working in the same firm in Tamil Nadu today. Similarly, the ‘Himayat Programme’ came as a boon for Fiaz Ahmad of Doda district. Fiaz passed the 12thclass examination in 2012, but due to an illness, he could not continue his studies. Fiaz, battled a heart disease for two years. Meanwhile, one of his brothers and a sister also died. In a way, his family was overwhelmed by trials and tribulations! Eventually, he was helped by the ‘Himayat Programme’. He received training in ITES i.e. ‘Information Technology Enabled Services’ uder the aegis of the ‘Himayat Programme’ and today he is employed in Punjab.
Fiyaz Ahmed’s graduate studies, which he continued simultaneously with his training under the ‘Himayat Programme’, is also nearing completion. Recently, he was invited to share his experience at a ‘Himayat Programme’ Fiyaz while narrating his story, had tears welling in his eyes. Similarly, Rakib-ul-Rahman of Anantnag could not complete his studies due to financial constraints. One day, Rakib came to know about the ‘Himayat Programme’ through a mobilisation camp in his block. Rakib immediately enrolled himself in the Retail Team Leader course. After completing his training today he is working in a corporate house. There are many examples of talented youth who have become symbols of change in Jammu and Kashmir, benefiting from ‘Himayat Mission’. The ‘HimayatProgramme’is a perfect example of a great synergy between the government, training partners, job providing companies and the people of Jammu and Kashmir.
This program has given a new found confidence to the youth in Jammu and Kashmir, and shown them a way to forge ahead.
My dear countrymen, on the 26th of this month, we witnessed the last solar eclipse of this decade. Possibly, this solar eclipse prompted Ripun to write a very interesting comment on the MyGov portal. He writes, “Hello sir. My name is Ripun…I belong to the North-East, and am currently working in south India. I would like to share something with you. I remember that due to the clear skies in our region, we used to gaze at the stars in the sky for hours together. I used to enjoy star-gazing. Now I am a professional, and because of my daily routine, I am unable to find time for such activities…can you discuss this topic in your show. Particularly, on how to popularise astronomy among the youth.
My dear countrymen, I receive a lot of suggestions, but it would be safe to say that this suggestion is unique. I have often spoken about many aspects of science. Especially the insistence of the youth has given me an opportunity to talk about science. But this topic has never been broached, and since the solar eclipse occurred on the 26th of this month, possibly you might also be interested in this topic. Like my countrymen, especially the youth among them, I too was eager to watch the solar eclipse on the 26th of December. But unfortunately, on that day overcast skies in Delhi prevented me from enjoying the sight. Though, I did get to see beautiful pictures of the solar eclipse that was visible in Kozhikode and some other parts of India. The sun was visible in the form of a shining ring. On that day, I had the opportunity to talk to some experts in this field…and they told me, that this is caused due to the fact that the moon is located far away from the earth and hence, it is unable to completely cover the sun. Hence, a ring-like shape is formed. This solar eclipse is an annular solar eclipse, also referred to as ‘Valay Grahan’ or ‘Kundal Grahan’. The eclipse reminds us that that we are travelling in space while residing on the earth. Sun, moon and other planets and celestial bodies are orbiting in space. Due to the shadow of the moon, we get to see the various forms of solar eclipse. Friends, India has an ancient and glorious history of astronomy. Our connection with the twinkling stars in the sky is as old as our civilisation. Many of you might be aware that at various places in India, there are magnificent observatories (Jantar Mantars) – which are worth seeing. And these observatories have a deep bond with astronomy. Who doesn’t know about the prodigious talent of the great Aryabhatta.
During his career, he has expounded in great detail about the solar eclipse, as well as the lunar eclipse. And he has explained it both from a philosophical as well as a mathematical standpoint. Mathematically, he has described how to calculate the size of the shadow of the earth. He has also provided accurate information on how to calculate the duration and extent of the eclipse. His disciples like Bhaskara, strived hard to further this spirit of inquiry and knowledge. Later, in the fourteenth or fifteenth century, Maadhav of Sangam village in Kerala, used calculus to calculate the position of planets in the universe. The night sky, was not merely something that whetted the curiosity. It was an important source for mathematicians and scientists. A few years ago, I had unveiled a book called “Pre-modern Kutchi Navigation Techniques and Voyages’. This book, in a way, is the diary of Maalam. Maalam was a navigator and whatever he experienced professionally, he recorded it in his diary. Even in the modern age, the very same “Maalam’s volume’ exists as a collection of ancient Gujarati manuscripts. It describes ancient navigation technology, and that ‘Maalam’s volume’ repeatedly references, the sky, the stars, the speed of the stars, and clearly describes how the direction is determined in sea voyages with the help of stars; it is stars that navigate us towards our destination.
My dear countrymen, India is quite advanced in the field of astronomy, and we have taken path-breaking initiatives in this field. We have a giant meter-wave telescope near Pune. Not just that, in Kodaikkaanal, Udagamandala, Guru Shikhar and Hanle Ladakh as well, powerful telescopes are located. In 2016, the then Prime Minister of Belgium and I, had inaugurated the 3.6 metre Devasthal optical telescope in Nainital. This is known as Asia’s largest telescope. ISRO has an astronomical satellite called ASTROSAT. ISRO is planning to launch a satellite called Aditya, to study the sun. Whether it be our ancient knowledge in astronomy, or modern achievements in this field, we should strive to understand them and feel proud of them. Today, our young scientists not only display a great desire to know their scientific history, but also are resolute in fashioning astronomy’s future.
The planetariums in our country, in addition to increasing the understanding of the night sky, also motivate people to develop star gazing as a hobby. Many people install amateur telescopes on their balconies or terrace. Star gazing can also encourage rural camps and rural picnics.
And there are many such schools and colleges that form astronomy clubs, and such steps must be encouraged.
My dear countrymen, we consider our Parliament as the temple of our democracy. Today, I wish to proudly mention, that the parliamentarians that you have elected have broken all the records of the last 60 years. In the last 6 months, both the sessions of the 17th Lok Sabha have been very productive. Lok sabha’s productivity stands at 114%, while that of Rajya Sabha is 94%. And prior to that in the budget session, it had a productivity of 135%. Often, Parliament functioned till late at night. I am mentioning this because all Parliamentarians deserve to be congratulated and complimented for this. The Parliamentarians that you elected, have broken all the records of the last 60 years. So much accomplishment, in itself shows the strength of Indian democracy and the faith in democracy. I wish to congratulate all the Presiding officers, all political parties and all members of parliament for their active role in this regard.
My dear countrymen, the movement of the sun, moon and earth doesn’t just determine eclipses, rather many other things are also associated with them. We all know, that based on the sun’s motion, various festivals will be celebrated throughout India in the middle of January. From Punjab to Tamil Nadu…from Gujarat to Assam…people will celebrate various festivals. Makar Sankraanti and UttaraayaN is celebrated with great fervour in the month of January. They are considered a symbol of energy. During this time, we will see the celebration of Lohri in Punjab, Pongal in Tamil Nadu and Maagh Biihu in Assam. These festivals have a close link with the prosperity of farmers and their crops. These festivals remind us of India’s unity as well as its diversity. The countrymen have the proud privilege to celebrate the last day of Pongal as the birth anniversary of the great Tiruvalluvar . This day is dedicated to the great writer-philosopher-saint Tiruvalluvar and his life.
My dear countrymen, this is the final episode of “Man ki Baat” in 2019. We will meet again in 2020. New Year, new decade, new resolutions, new energy, new enthusiasm, new zeal – come let’s move forth. Let’s enable ourselves to fulfill our resolutions. We have to walk far, we have to achieve a lot, we have to take our country to new heights. Let’s show immense faith in the pursuits (actions), the abilities and the resolve of 130 crore countrymen, and come – let’s move forth. Many many thanks, many many good wishes.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today is the 26th of January. Heartiest greetings to you on the Festival of our Republic. This is our first meeting of minds in the year 2020, through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This is the first such programme of the year; nay, of the decade. Friends, this time, it came across as appropriate to change the broadcast time of Mann Ki Baat, on account of the Republic Day Celebrations. And that is why I am reaching out to you this evening through Mann Ki Baat, having thought of a separate time slot. Friends, every day is a new day; weeks and months keep seeing change; years witness transformation, except for the enthusiasm and fervor of the people of India! And, of course, we are no less… we are certain to outdo ourselves. The spirit of ‘can do’, is emerging as a new resolve. The sentiment of contributing positively to the country & society is gaining strength, day by day. Friends, we have come together, once again, on the dais of Mann Ki Baat. This is to discuss newer subjects; to celebrate the latest achievements of our countrymen; in fact, to celebrate India. Mann Ki Baat has emerged as a fruitful, frank, effortless & organic platform for sharing, learning and growing together. Every month, thousands of people share their suggestions, their efforts, and their experiences thereby. And through the endeavour, we get a chance to discuss some extraordinary feats by people, which serve as a beacon of inspiration to society.
Somebody has succeeded in doing something – can we too achieve that! Can that particular venture be replicated to bring about a colossal transformation in the entire country? Can we establish that change into permanence, turning it into a simple, natural social habit? In a likewise quest to seek answers, the caravan of Mann Ki Baat progresses with a few appeals, some invocations and a lot of resolves to do something. For the past many years, we would have made varied resolves. Just as, ‘No to single use plastic’, buying Khadi or ‘local’, sanitation & cleanliness, respect & honour for the girl child, or emphasizing on the new aspect of ‘less cash economy’! Many a resolve such as these came into being on account of our conversations & chats through Mann Ki Baat. And, you have been the ones who strengthened that.
I have received a lovely letter, written by Shriman Shailesh from Bihar. In fact, he no longer stays in Bihar. He says, he stays in Delhi, working for an NGO. Shailesh writes, “Modi ji, you appeal to us on one point or the other, in every episode of Mann Ki Baat. I have implemented many of them in letter & spirit. This winter, I collected warm clothes from people, going home to home and distributed them to the needy. Taking a cue from Mann Ki Baat, I have embarked upon many initiatives. But gradually, I began forgetting… certain things started fading away. This new year, I have made a Charter pertaining to Mann Ki Baat, consisting of a list of all these, just the way people make resolutions at the onset of the New Year. Modi ji, this is my social resolution for this new year. I feel there are many little things that can usher in a big change. Can you inscribe your autograph on this Charter and arrange to send it back to me?” Well, Shailesh ji, heartiest congratulations and many good wishes to you. The Mann Ki Baat Charter in connection with your New Year resolution is very innovative. I shall certainly send it back to you, along with my best wishes inscribed. Friends, when I was glancing through this ‘Mann Ki Baat Charter’, I was taken aback at the magnitude of its contents… a multitude of hash tags. And, of course, we have striven together on myriad endeavours. There have been times when we tried to establish a stronger emotional connect with our soldiers through the campaign ‘Sandesh to Soldiers’; we have also catapulted sales of Khadi with ‘Khadi for Nation- Khadi for Fashion’. We internalized the Mantra of ‘buy local’. Through ‘Hum Fit toh India Fit’, we enhanced awareness, towards fitness. We turned sanitation into a mass movement, through the endeavours of ‘My clean India’ or ‘Statue Cleaning’. #‘No to Drugs’, #‘Bharat Ki Lakshmi’, #‘Self for Society’, #‘Stress free Exams’, #‘Suraksha- Bandhan’ #‘Digital Economy’, #‘Road Safety’…. Oh, the list is endless.
Shailesh ji, you must have realized after going through this Mann Ki Baat Charter that the list is indeed long! Come, let us continue this journey. Do join any cause of your choice listed in the Mann Ki Baat Charter. Using the hashtag, proudly share your contribution with one & all. Try motivating friends & family. When every Indian takes a step forward, it results in India going ahead by a 130 crore steps. And that’s why, it is said “Charaivetee, charaivetee, charaivetee…” Keep walking, keep marching, keep advancing! Your endeavour should revolve around that Mantra.
My dear countrymen, we touched upon the Mann Ki Baat Charter. The ethos of public participation, besides in the area of sanitation, is rising rapidly on another front… and that is water conservation. Quite a few extensive & innovative efforts are under way, in every corner of the country, for the sake of conserving water. It gives me joy to let you know that the Jal-Shakti Campaign that commenced last monsoon is taking rapid, successful strides with the aid of public participation. A large number of lakes & ponds have been built. And the best part is that in this campaign, people from all strata of society contributed wholeheartedly. Take for instance Jalore district in Rajasthan. There, two historical step wells had turned into storehouses of garbage & dirty water. But one fine day, hundreds of people from Bhadraayun & Thanawala Panchayats took a resolve to rejuvenate them, under the Jal Shakti Campaign. Much before the rains, people immersed themselves in the task of cleaning out the accumulated filthy water, garbage and morass. For this campaign, some donated money; others their labour & sweat. As a result, these step wells have turned into their lifelines now. A similar story comes across from Barabanki in Uttar Pradesh.
Here, the Saraahi Lake, spread across 43 hectares was on the verge of breathing its last. But the villagers, through the power of their collective resolve pumped life into it. They did not let any deterrent enter in the way of this mammoth mission. Villages joined hands, one after the other. They built a one meter high embankment along all the four sides of the lake. The lake now is brimming with water; the surroundings wake up to the melody of the chirping of birds.
Village Suniyakot along the Almora-Haldwani highway in Uttarakhand has also emerged as a similar example of public participation. To tide over an acute water crisis, villagers took it upon themselves to ensure that water reached their village. There was no stopping to their resolve. People raised money among themselves. The plan was followed by collective donation of labour and from almost a kilometre away, a pipe was laid upto the village. A pumping station was set up. By and by, a two decade old agonizing problem came to an end. Whereas, a very innovative idea of harnessing a borewell for rainwater harvesting sprung up from Tamilnadu. The country is replete with innumerable such stories, of water conservation, lending more strength to the resolves of New India. Today the entire country is eager to hear similar accomplishments of our Jal Shakti champions. I urge you to share without fail, stories, photos & videos of such endeavours of water conservation and water harvesting undertaken by you or those around you using #Jalshakti4India.
My dear countrymen and especially all my young friends, today, through the forum of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I congratulate the Government and the people of Assam for being the excellent hosts of ‘Khelo India’. Friends, on 22nd January, the third ‘Khelo India Games’ concluded in Guwahati. These games had around 6 thousand players from different states participating. You will be surprised to know that 80 records were broken during this grand sports festival. And I am proud that of these 80 records, 56 were broken by our daughters. These laurels have been recorded in the name of our daughters! I along with all the winners, congratulate all the participants. I also thank all the people, coaches and technical officers associated with ‘Khelo India Games’ for organising them successfully.
It is very pleasant for all of us to learn that the participation of athletes in ‘Khelo India Games’ is on the upsurge year after year. And this also tells you about the increasing inclination towards sports in our school children. I wish to tell all of you that in 2018, when ‘Khelo India Games’ were instituted, thirty-five hundred players took part, but in just three years the number of players has increased to more than 6 thousand, which translates to the fact that it has almost doubled. Not only this, in just three years, through ‘Khelo India Games’, thirty-two hundred gifted children have emerged on the sporting horizon! Many of these children grew up amidst dearth and poverty. The stories of the patience and determination of these children who participated in ‘Khelo India Games’ as well as their parents will inspire every Indian. Now take the example of Purnima Mandal of Guwahati, a sanitation worker in Guwahati Municipal Corporation! But whereas her daughter Malvika showed her mettle in football, one of her sons Sujit represented Assam in Kho-Kho, while the other son Pradeep did the same in hockey.
Somewhat similar is the story of Yogananthan of Tamil Nadu which fills you with great pride! Yogananthanmakesbeedis in Tamil Nadu, but his daughter Purnashree won everyone’s heart by bagging the Gold Medal in Weight Lifting. If I now take the name of David Beckham, you will think whether I’m referring to the legendary International Footballer. But now we also have a David Beckham amidst us and he has won a gold medal at the Youth Games in Guwahati. That too in the 200-meter Sprint event in Cycling! And for me this means double joy. You know, some time ago I had visited Andaman-Nicobar Islands! There was David, a denizen of Car-Nicobar who had lost his parents while he was an infant! His uncle wanted him to become a footballer, and hence had named him after the famous footballer. But young David was obsessed with cycling. He was selected under the ‘Khelo India’ scheme and today you can witness for yourself that he has created a new record in cycling.
Prashant Singh Kanhaiya of Bhiwani broke his own national record in the Pole vault event. Prashant, 19, hails from an agrarian family. You will be surprised to know that Prashant used to practice Pole vault on clay! After knowing this amazing fact, the Sports Department helped his coach to run the academy at Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium, Delhi and today Prashant is being coached there.
The never say die story of Kareena Shankta of Mumbai inspires everyone. Kareena competed in the 100 metre breast-stroke event in swimming, won the gold medal in the Under-17 category and also set a new national record. However there was a time for Kareena, a 10th standard student when she had to forego her training due to a knee injury. But Kareena and her mother did not lose courage and the result of that fortitude is evident in front of all of us today. I wish all the players a bright future. Along with this, I also, on behalf of all our countrymen, bow in honouring those parents, who did not permit poverty to become a hurdle for the future of their children. We all know that National Games is an arena, where players get a chance to display their passion besides becoming acquainted with the culture of other states. Therefore, we have decided to organize ‘Khelo India University Games’ every year on the pattern of ‘Khelo India Youth Games’.
Friends, next month, the first edition of ‘Khelo India University Games’ is being organized in Cuttack and Bhubaneswar, Odisha from 22nd February to 1st March. And more than 3000 players have qualified for participating in these games.
My dear countrymen, the exam season has arrived, and obviously all the students will be busy giving final shape to their preparations. After my experience with millions of students of the country through the platform of ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’, I can say with confidence that the youth of the country is brimming with self-confidence and is ready to face every challenge.
Friends, on the one hand, we are facing examinations; on the other, the winter season. Betwixt these two I urge you to try & keep fit. Do some exercises or play a little! Sports & games is the key to keeping fit. By the way, these days, I see that many events pertaining to ‘Fit India’ are being organised. On January 18, our young friends organized a Cyclothon throughout the country. Millions of countrymen participating in this Cyclothon spread the message of fitness. Efforts to ensure that our New India remains fit that are evident at every level fills us with fervour & enthusiasm. The ‘Fit India School’ campaign, which started in November last year, is also bringing results. I have been told that till date, more than 65,000 schools have obtained the ‘Fit India School’ certificates through online registration. I urge the rest of the schools in the country to integrate physical activity and sports with education and ensure that they become a ‘fit school’. Also concomitantly, I appeal to all countrymen to promote more physical activity in their daily routine. Remind yourself every day that if we are fit India is fit!
My dear countrymen, a couple of weeks ago, different parts of India were celebrating a variety of festivals. When Punjab was spreading the warmth of enthusiasm by celebrating Lohri, sisters and borthers of Tamil Nadu were celebrating Pongal and birth anniversary of Thiruvalluvar. Assam was aglow with the fascinating lustre of Bihu. In Gujarat, everywhere you could see kites in the sky and the pomp of Uttaraayan. In such an atmosphere, Delhi witnessed a historic event. A significant agreement was signed in Delhi. With it, the close-to-25-year-old Bru-Reang refugee crisis, a painful chapter, was put to an end forever and ever. Due to the busy routine and festive season, you might not have been able to learn about this historic agreement in detail. So I thought, I should definitely discuss this in Mann ki Baat. This problem pertains to the 90s. In 1997, ethnic tension forced the Bru-Reang tribe to leave Mizoram and take refuge in Tripura. These refugees were kept in temporary camps in Kanchanpur in North Tripura. It’s painful that the Bru-Reang community lost a significant part of their life as refugees. Life in camps meant that they were deprived of all basic amenities. For 23 years – no home, no land, no medical treatment for their families, no education facilities for their kids. Just imagine, how difficult it must have been for them to live 23 long years in trying circumstances in camps! How painful it would have been to spend every moment, every day of their lives hurtling towards an uncertain future! Governments came and went, but there was no cure for their pain. Despite that, their unwavering belief in the Indian Constitution and culture continued. It’s a result of that belief that their life is on the threshold of a new dawn today. As per the agreement, the path to a dignified life has been opened for them. Finally the new decade of 2020, has brought a new ray of hope in the life of the Bru-Reang community. Around 34000 Bru refugees will be rehabilitated in Tripura. Not just that, the government will provide an assistance of close to Rs.600 crores for their rehabilitation and all-round development. Each displaced family will be provided a plot of land. They will be assisted in construction of a house. In addition, rations will be provided to them. They will now be able to benefit from the public welfare schemes of the state and central governments. This agreement is special for many reasons. It symbolises the spirit of cooperative federalism. The Chief Ministers of both Mizoram and Tripura were present during the signing of the agreement. This agreement was made possible only because of the consent and good wishes of people from both the states. I would like to especially express my gratitude to the people and the Chief Ministers of both the states for making this possible. This agreement also epitomises the inherent compassion and sensitivity of Indian culture. Considering everyone as its own and living with the spirit of togetherness is embedded in the ethos of this holy land. I would once again like to congratulate the residents of these states and the Bru-Reang community.
My dear countrymen, Assam, which hosted the grand ‘Khelo India’ games successfully, was witness to another great achievement. You might also have seen it in the news, that a few days ago, 644 militants pertaining to 8 different militant groups, surrendered with their weapons. Those who had strayed twards the path of violence, have expressed their faith in peace and decided to become a partner in the country’s progress and return to the mainstream. Last year, in Tripura as well, more than 80 people left the path of violence and returned to the mainstream. Those who had picked up weapons thinking that violence could solve problems, now firmly believe that the only way to solve any dispute is peace and togetherness. Countrymen will be thrilled to know that insurgency in the North-East has considerably reduced. And the biggest reason for that is that every issue of this region is being honestly and peacefully solved through dialogue. On the solemn occasion of Republic day, I would appeal to anyone in any part of the country, who’s still seeking solutions to problems through violence and weapons, to return to the mainstream. They should have faith in their own capabilities and the capabilities of this country to resolve issues peacefully. We live in the 21st century, that is the era of knowledge, science and democracy. Have you ever heard of a place where life has turned better due to violence? Have you ever heard of a place where peace and goodwill have been impediments in the quest of a good life? Violence never resolves any issue. No problem in the world can be solved by creating another problem. It can only be solved by seeking an optimal solution. Come, let’s together forge a new India, where every issue is resolved on a platform of peace. Solidarity should be the key to resolving every issue. And brotherhood, should foil every separatist attempt to divide us.
My dear countrymen, on the solemn occasion of Republic Day, it gives me great joy to tell you about ‘Gaganyaan’. The country has taken another step towards this goal. In 2022, we will be celebrating 75 years of Independence. And on that occasion, we have to fulfil the pledge to take an Indian into space through the Gaganyaan mission. Gaganyaan mission will be a historic achievement in the field of science and technology for India in the 21st century. It will prove to be a milestone for New India.
Friends, you would be aware that four candidates have been already selected as astronauts for this mission. All of them are pilots of the Indian Air Force. These promising youngsters symbolise India’s skill, talent, ability, courage and dreams. Our four friends are about to go to Russia in a few days for their training. I am confident that this would script another golden chapter in India-Russia friendship and cooperation. They will be trained for over a year. After that, the responsibility of carrying the hopes and aspirations of the nation and soaring into space, will rest on the shoulders of one of them. On the auspicious occasion of Republic Day, I congratulate these four youngsters and the Indian and Russian scientists and engineers associated with this mission.
My dear countrymen, in March last year, a video had become the centre of attention in the media and the social media. The buzz was about how a 107 year old elderly motherly figure broke the protocol to bless the President. This lady was Saalumarada Timmakka (सालुमरदअ तिम्मक्कअ), who is famous in Karnataka as ‘Vriksha Maataa’ (Tree Mother). And the ceremony was the Padma Awards distribution. The country recognised and honoured the extraordinary contribution of Timmakka who comes from an ordinary background. She was being decorated with the Padma Shri award ceremony.
Friends, today India feels proud of such great personalities and feels honoured to honour such down to earth, rooted individuals. Like every year, last evening Padma awards were announced. I urge you to read up about each of the awardees. Discuss their contribution with your family. This year over 46000 nominations were received for the 2020 Padma awards. This number is more than 20 times the number of nominations received in 2014. This statistic reveals the faith of every one of us and tells us that the Padma Awards have now become the Peoples’ awards. The entire process of the Padma Awards is now completed online. Earlier, the decision was taken by a select few. Now, it’s completely people driven. We could even say that there is now a new found faith and respect for these awards in the country. Many among the awardees are those who have risen from the bottom of the pyramid through dint of their hard work. They have overcome limitations of resources and a terrible atmosphere of despair around them and forged ahead. In fact, their strong resolve, spirit of selfless service, inspires us all. Once again, I would like to congratulate all the Padma award recipients. I urge you to read up about them and gather more information. The extraordinary stories of their lives, will inspire the society in the true spirit.
My dear countrymen, once again many many good wishes for the Republic Day celebrations. May this new decade bring new resolve and new achievements for each of you, and for the country. And may India surely achieve the capabilities to fulfil the expectations that the world has from India. With this belief, come, let’s start a new decade. Let’s serve Mother India with a new found resolve. Many many thanks. Namaskar. (Goodbye).
My dear countrymen, I am fortunate to have got an opportunity once again to greet citizens from Kutch to Kohima, Kashmir to Kanyakumari; in fact across the length & breadth of the country. Namaskar to all of you. Reflecting on the expanse & diversity of our land, revering them fills each & every Indian with a sense of pride. And an opportunity to experience this varied diversity is one that touches the heart, filling it up with joy; it is a flower that radiates inspiration. A few days ago, at a small place at the Hunar Haat in Delhi, I witnessed hues of our country’s diverse expanse, cultures, traditions, cuisines & the warmth of emotions. As a matter of fact the repertoire comprising traditional attires, handicrafts, carpets, utensils, Bamboo & brass products, Phulkari of Punjab, exotic leatherwork of Andhra Pradesh, beautiful paintings from Tamilnadu, brass products of Uttar Pradesh, Bhadohi carpets, copper work of Kutch, a number of musical instruments & innumerable stories; the vivid mosaic of pan- Indian art & culture was truly unique. The stories of the artisans’ perseverance, zeal & love for their skill are equally inspiring as well. Listening to a divyang woman at the Hunar Haat was a source of fulfillment. She told me that earlier she used to sell paintings on the pavement. Her life changed after she connected with Hunar Haat. Today, she is not only self- reliant; she has purchased a house too. At Hunar Haat, I got the opportunity to converse with many other artisans. I am told that over 50 per cent of the crafts persons participating at Hunar Haat are women. Also, during the last three years, through Hunar Haat, close to three lakh artisans & crafts persons have gained many opportunities of employment. Hunar Haat, of course, is a platform showcasing art & craft; it is also lending wings to people’s dreams. It is a venue where it is impossible to overlook the country’s diversity. Besides handicrafts, it displays the diversity of India’s varied cuisine too. In a single row, one could savour the sight of Idli- Dosa, Chhole- Bhature, Daal- Baati, Khaman- Khandvi & what not! I thoroughly enjoyed having the delicious Litti- Chokha of Bihar. All over India, fairs & exhibitions such as this are organized from time to time. Whenever the opportunity arises, one should attend such events to know India, to experience India. Thus, not only would you be able to be a part of the country’s art-culture canvas; you will also contribute in the progress & prosperity of hardworking crafts persons, especially women. Do make it a point to visit.
My dear countrymen, our country is bestowed with great traditions. The legacy that we inherited from our ancestors, the knowledge & values that have permeated entail compassion toward each & every living being and boundless love for nature. All this is a part of our cultural heritage. And to partake of this culture of hospitality in the Indian ethos, every year, numerous species of birds from across the world come to India. Throughout the year, India is home to many migratory species. We are told that more than 500 varieties of birds fly in from varied regions. Recently, Gandhinagar was host to the COP- 13 convention, where this phenomenon was mulled over, discussed and deliberated. India’s efforts concerning the subject were lauded too. Friends, it is a matter of pride for us that for the next three years, India will chair the COP convention on migratory species. Do send in your suggestions on lending more substance to this opportunity, making it more useful.
While discussing the COP convention with you, an important piece of information connected with Meghalaya drew my attention. Very recently, biologists have discovered a new species of fish whose habitat is within the caves of Meghalaya. It is believed that this fish is the largest among aquatic species found under the surface of caves. It lives in deep, dark underground caves, with little chance of light reaching in. Scientists are perplexed at the ability of this large fish to survive in such deep caves. It is a matter of joy that our India, and especially Meghalaya is home to a rare species. It lends a new facet to India’s bio-diversity. We are surrounded by many such mysteries, which are still undiscovered. To discover such a phenomenal enigma calls for fierce detective passion.
The great Tamil poetess Avvaiyar writes: Kattat Kemaavoon Kalladaru Udgadvu, Kaddat Kamiyan Adva Kalladar Olaaadu.
This means, what we know is but just a handful of sand; what we do not know is like a universe in itself. Similar is the case with the biodiversity of this country. The more you know, the more you realize the magnitude of what you do not know. Our biodiversity too is a unique treasure for the entire human kind. We have to preserve it, conserve it & explore further.
My dear young friends, children & the youth in India are increasingly taking a keen interest in Science & Technology. Record satellite launches into space, new records, new missions fills up every Indian heart with a sense of pride. When I was in Bengaluru during Chandrayan-2, I witnessed immense enthusiasm & fervor on the part of the children present there. There was no sign of drowsiness from any angle. In a way, they kept awake throughout the night. One can never forget their inquisitiveness when it came to Science, Technology and Innovation. To give a fillip to this very enthusiasm in children & young people; to encourage scientific temper in them, another system has been put in place. You can now sit & watch rocket launching at Sriharikota, taking place in front of your own eyes. Recently, the facility has been made open for all. A visitors’ gallery has been erected, large enough to seat 10 thousand people. Online booking is also possible through a link provided on ISRO’s website. I am told that many schools are arranging tour for their students to show them rocket launching and motivate them. I urge the Principals & teachers of all schools that they should avail of this benefit in times to come.
Friends, I would like to convey to you another exciting piece of information. I’d read the comment of Paras from Dhanbad, Jharkhand on Namo App. Paras wants me to tell our young friends about ISRO’s ‘Yuvika’ programme. ‘Yuvika’ is a very commendable effort on part of ISRO to integrate the youth with science. This program was launched for school students in the year 2019. ‘Yuvika’  is an acronym for ‘ Yuva Vigyani Karyakram and this program is in consonance with our vision, “Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan, Jai Vigyan, Jai Anusandhaan’. In this programme, students, after their exams, during their holidays, visit different centres of ISRO and learn about Space Technology, Space Science and Space Applications. If you want to know how training is imparted, what its nuances are, how exciting it is, then you must read the experience of those who have attended its earlier sessions. If you wish to be a participant of this training, you can register by visiting the website of ‘Yuvika’ linked to that of ISRO. My young friends, I’m telling you the name of the website which you can write down, and must visit today itself. It is – www.yuvika.isro.gov.in. Have you written it down?
My dear countrymen, the beautiful valleys of Ladakh witnessed a momentous event on the 31
st
of January 2020, for History was made when an Indian Air Force AN-32 aircraft took off from Leh’s Kushok Bakula Rimpoche Airport. A mixture of 10% Indian Bio-jet fuel was used in this flight and this was the first time that this mix was used in both engines. Not just that, but the airport from which this plane took off from Leh is not only one of the highest altitude airports in India but also in the world! Notably, the bio-jet fuel is prepared from non-edible tree borne oil. It is procured from various tribal areas of India. These efforts will not only reduce carbon emissions but may also reduce India’s dependence on crude oil imports. I congratulate all the people involved in this significant mission, especially the scientists of CSIR and Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun, who made it possible to develop the technology to fly an aircraft with bio-fuel. Their efforts also empower the ‘Make in India’ mission.
My dear countrymen, our new India is not willing to tag along with the old approach. In particular, our sisters and mothers of New India are going ahead and grasping the challenges hands on thus setting a pace for a positive transformation in the entire society. The region of Purnia in Bihar is an inspiration for people across the country. This area has been grappling with the havoc caused by floods for decades together. In this backdrop, it has been very difficult to do farming and mobilize other sources of income. But under these very circumstances, some women of Purnia chose a different path. Friends, earlier the women of Purnia used to cultivate cocoons from silkworms obtained from Mulberry trees, and received very nominal price for their produce, while merchants who bought this raw silk made huge profits by spinning it into silk yarn. But today, the women of Purnia have taken a new initiative that has changed the entire scenario. These women formed mulberry-production co-operatives with assistance from the Government. After that, they spun silk yarn from the cocoons, and also started getting saris made with those threads. You will be surprised to know that the very cocoons were sold for a nominal amount earlier; saris made from them are fetching thousands of rupees now. The Didis of the ‘Adarsh ​​Jeevika Mahila Mulberry Production Group’ have performed miracles that are being witnessed across many villages. The Farmer Didis of many villages of Purnia are not only getting saris produced, but are also selling them in big fairs by putting up their own stalls – an example of how today’s women fortified with new power, new thinking are achieving new targets.
My dear countrymen, the entrepreneurship of women and daughters of our country, their courage, are a matter of pride for each one of us. We find many such examples around us which illustrate the manner in which our daughters are breaking age old shackles and attaining new heights. I would particularly like to share with you, the achievement of twelve-year-old daughter Kamya Karthikeyan. Kamya, at the age of just twelve years, has conquered Mount Aconcagua. This is the highest peak of the Andes Mountains in South America, which is about 7000 meters high. Every Indian will be touched by the fact that at the beginning of this month, when Kamya conquered the peak, the first thing she did was to hoist our tricolour there. I have also been told that Kamya, who has made the country proud, is now on a new mission, which is called ‘Mission Saahas’. Under this she is trying to conquer the highest peaks of all the continents. Also, under this mission she will also be skiing on North and South poles.
I wish Kamya all the best for ‘Mission Saahas’. By the way, Kamya’s achievement also motivates everyone of us to stay fit. Fitness has also contributed in great measure in Kamya’s achieving great heights at such a young age. A Nation that is fit, will always be a nation that is a hit. By the way the oncoming months are very opportune for adventure sports. The geography of India is such that it provides many opportunities for adventure sports in our country. On the one hand, we have high mountains, on the other, there is a desert spread far and wide. Similarly on the one hand we have a network of dense forests, on the other, there is an infinite expanse of the sea. Therefore, I make a special appeal to all of you to visit the place of your choice, pick up the activity of your interest and ensure integrating of your life with adventure. Shouldn’t there always be adventure in life? And on top of that friends, after knowing the success story of our twelve-year-old daughter Kamya, you will be astonished, once you hear the success story of 105-year-old Bhagirathi Amma.
Friends, if we wish to progress in life, develop ourselves, wish to achieve something in life, the first pre-condition for that is the student within us must never die. Our 105 year old Bhagirathi Amma, also gives us this inspiration. Now you would be wondering, who Bhagirathi Amma is! Bhagirathi Amma lives in Kollam in Kerala. She lost her mother when she was very young. Soon after her marriage at a young age, she lost her husband as well. But Bhagirathi Amma did not let go of her courage, did not lose her spirit. She had to quit school before she was 10-years-old. She restarted her school education at the age of 105! She started studying again!In spite of her advanced age, Bhagirathi Amma wrote her level 4 exam…and then eagerly awaited her results. She scored 75 percent in her exams. Not just that, she scored cent per cent marks in Mathematics. Amma now wants to continue her studies; wants to appear for higher exams. It’s obvious that people like Bhagirathi Amma are the strength of this country; a great source of inspiration for all of us. Today I specially salute Bhagirathi Amma.
Friends, our courage, our determination during adverse circumstances in life can help us completely alter the situation. Recently, I read one such story in the media, which I would surely like to share with you. This is the story of Salman who lives in Hamirpur village of Moradabad. Salman is divyang by birth. He is unable to stand on his feet. Despite this hardship, he hasn’t lost hope, and decided to start his own business. On top of that, he resolved to help other divyang people people too. And soon enough, Salman started manufacturing slippers and detergent in his village itself. And in no time, 30 divyang people joined him. Do also note, that while Salman himself found it difficult to walk, he decided to manufacture slippers, that help others walk easily. The important thing is that Salman trained his divyang colleagues himself. Now all of them jointly not only manufacture the products, but also market them. By dint of their hard work, they not only ensured employment for themselves, but also turned their venture into a profit-making one. Today, all of them together manufacture 150 pairs of slippers a day. Not just that, this year Salman has resolved to provide employment to 100 more such divyang mates. I salute their courage and their enterprise. A similar determination has been manifested by residents of Ajrak village in Kutch area of Gujarat. In 2001, after the devastating earthquake, most villagers were migrating from the village. However, one person by the name of Ismail Khatri, decided to stay back and nurture his traditional art form of ‘Ajrak print’. And in no time at all, everyone was enchanted by the natural colours used in the Ajrak art. And the entire village joined in on their traditional handicraft category. The villagers not only nurtured their ages-old art form, but also fused it with modern fashion. Now major designers and Design Institutions have started using the Ajrak Print. The hardworking village folk have today turned ‘Ajrak print’ into a major brand. Large international buyers are now getting attracted towards this print.
My dear countrymen, recently the festival of Maha Shivaratri was celebrated throughout the country. The blessings of Lord Shiva and Mother Parvati has kept the ethos of this nation awakened. On the occasion of Mahashivaratri, may you continue to be blessed by Bhole baba…may Lord Shiva fulfill all your wishes…may you be energetic, healthy…and continue to do your duties unto the country.
Friends, along with Mahashivaratri, now the splendour of spring will keep blooming day by day. In the coming days, we will celebrate Holi and soon after that, Gudi Padva will be celebrated. The festival of Navaraatri is also associated with spring. Ram Navami will also be celebrated. Festivals and celebrations are an inseparable part of the social fabric of our country. Every festival has a hidden social message which binds not just the society, but the entire country into a spirit of unity. After Holi, from the Chaitra Shukla Pratipada, the Indian Vikrami New year also begins. For that too, please accept my greetings in advance.
My dear countrymen, I think students will be busy with their examinations till the next Mann Ki Baat. Those who have completed their examinations, will be carefree. My heartiest wishes to those who are busy, and also to those who are carefree. We will meet again in the next edition of Mann Ki Baat with lots of new topics.
Many many thanks. Namaskaar.
My dear countrymen, generally speaking, I touch upon varied subjects in Mann ki Baat. But today, the foremost concern in everyone’s mind in the country and all over the world is the catastrophic Corona Global Pandemic. Amidst that, it will not be appropriate on my part to reflect on anything else. But first of all, I extend a heartfelt apology to all countrymen. And I strongly feel from the core of my heart that you will forgive me – since certain decisions had to be taken, resulting in myriad hardships for you. And when it comes to my underprivileged brothers and sisters, they must be wondering on the kind of Prime Minister they have, who has pushed them to the brink! My wholehearted apologies, especially to them. It is possible that many are annoyed with me for their confinement in their homes. I fully understand your situation; I can feel what you are going through. But in order to battle Corona in a country of 130 crore people such as India, there was no other option. The fight against Corona is one between life and death itself…we have to win. And that is why such strong measures had to be resorted to. No one wants to go that way; looking at what the world is going through, this was the only way left. After all, the safety of you and your families has to be ensured.  Once again, I apologize for any inconvenience, any hardship caused to you. Friends, we have an adage-“
Evam Evam Vikar, api  tarunha Saadhyate Sukham
”… which means, an illness and its scourge should be nipped in the bud itself. Later when it becomes incurable its treatment is very difficult. Today the whole of India, every Indian is doing just that.  Brothers, Sisters, Mothers and the elderly, Corona virus has incarcerated the world. It is posing a challenge to Knowledge, science, the rich and the poor, the strong and the weak alike. It is not confined to any nation’s borders, nor does it make distinction of region or season. This virus has, in a way, obstinately picked up the gauntlet to annihilate the human race. And that is why humankind will have to rise unitedly, in the resolve to exterminate it. Some may feel that by complying with the lockdown, they are helping others! This is a misconception. This lockdown is a means to protect yourself. You have to protect yourself and your family. For the next many days, you have to continue displaying this patience; abide by the
Lakshman Rekha.
Friends, I know that no one wants to overstep the law and break rules wilfully. But there are some who are doing so, since they are not trying to understand the gravity of the matter. To them I will say that if they don’t comply with the lockdown rule, it will be difficult to save ourselves from the scourge of the Corona virus! The world over, many people nursed this delusion….all of them are regretting now. Friends, we are familiar with our adage “
Aarogyam Param Bhagyam, Swasthyam Sarwaarth Sadhanam
” -which means good health is the greatest fortune. Health is the only way to happiness in the world. In that backdrop, those breaking the rules are playing with their lives. Friends, in this war, there are many soldiers who are fighting the Corona virus, not in the confines of their homes but outside their homes. These are our front line soldiers-especially our brothers and sisters on duty as nurses, doctors and paramedical staff. These are people who have defeated corona. Today, we shall draw inspiration from them. During the course of the last few days, I spoke to a few such people over the phone, boosting their zeal, in turn raising my own enthusiasm too. I have learnt a lot from them. It was my earnest desire to share with you excerpts of the conversation I had with them, in Mann ki Baat. The first
to join us is Shri RamagampaTeja Ji. He happens to be an IT professional….let’s listen to his experiences.
Yes Ram,
Ramgampa Teja:  Namaste ji
PM: Yes Ram, Namaste
RT : Namaste, Namaste
PM: I have come to know that you have freed yourself from the clutches of the Corona virus!
RT: Yes
PM: I wanted to talk to you. Since you just came out of the danger zone, I wanted to listen to your experience.
RT: I am an employee of the IT sector. I had gone to Dubai for work; for meetings. It just happened willy-nilly. On my return it began with a fever. After 4 or 5 days, doctors conducted a test for Corona virus. It turned out positive. I was admitted to Gandhi Hospital, Government Hospital, Hyderabad, where I recovered after 14 days and was discharged. All this was a bit scary.
PM: You mean when you came to know of the infection?
RT: Yes
PM: And did you know earlier that virus was dangerous and could put you in trouble?
RT: Yes
PM: So, when it happened to you, what was your immediate response?
RT:  First…I was very scared, not ready to believe that it had happened.  And how? Because in India, there were only two or three cases, I didn’t know anything about it. When I was admitted to the hospital, they kept me in a quarantine. The first 2-3 days passed just like that. But the doctors and nurses there…
PM: Yes!
RT: They were very nice to me. They would call me up and talk to me and give me confidence that nothing will happen, I would be okay, they kept on saying. Twice or thrice a day, doctors would speak to me…nurses too. So first I was afraid, but later I felt I was with very good people, who knew what to do. I felt I would get better.
P.M : How were family members feeling?
R.T : When I was admitted to the hospital. Everyone was under stress. Media also created some problem there. Everyone’s attention was drawn to it. But yes. First they all had to undergo a test. The result was negative, which was the biggest blessing for us, for our family and all those around me. After that, there was improvement each day. Doctors were talking to me and informing family too.
P.M. : What precautions did you take? What precautions were there for family?
R.T : When the family first came to know, I was in quarantine. But even after quarantine, doctors told me to stay at home for 14 days…House quarantine for myself in my room. So even after coming home, I am at home mostly in my room, wearing a mask the whole day. When I come out for food, hand washing is most important.
PM: Fine Ram! You’ve returned to good health. Good wishes to you and family.
RT: Thank you.
PM: But I want this experience of yours
RT: Yes!
PM: You are from the IT profession,
RT: Yes
PM: So make an audio and…
RT: Yes
PM: Share it with people, make it viral on social media. What will happen is, people will not be scared and at the same time, points on adequate care and preventive measures will easily reach people.
RT: Yes, when I came out, I saw people feeling that being in quarantine is like being in a jail. It is not like that. Everyone should know that government quarantine is for their sake; for their families. On that I would like to ask maximum people to get the test done and not be afraid of quarantine. There should be no stigma attached to being on quarantine.
PM: Fine Ram. Many good wishes to you.
RT: Thank you, Thank you.
PM: Thank you Bhaiyya…Thanks a lot.
RT: Thank you.
Friends,  as Ram said, he followed Doctor’s instructions fully when suspected of having Corona. And as a result, he is leading a healthy, normal life today. Another friend, who has defeated Corona is joining us now. His entire family had come under the clasp of this scourge, including a teenage son. Come let us speak to Shriman Ashok Kapoor from Agra.
PM: Ashok ji, Namaste!
Ashok Kapoor: Namaskar ji! I am lucky to be talking to you.
PM: Fine. Am fortunate too. I called you up, since your entire family had to hear the brunt.
AK: ji ji.
PM: I would certainly like to know as to how this infection was diagnosed. What had happened? What happened in the hospital? So that, after listening to you, if something important is to be conveyed to countrymen, I can use that.
AK: Absolutely Sir. I have two sons. They had gone to Italy to attend a shoe fair. We run a factory here, manufacturing shoes.
PM: Yes!
AK: So, when they returned from Italy…
PM: Yes!
AK: Our son in law too had gone there. He stays in Delhi. Feeling a health problem, He went to Ram Manohar Lohiya hospital.
PM: Ok
AK: They said it was positive. They shifted him to Safdurjung.
PM: Yes
AK: They called us up asking both my sons to get tested since they had been with him. Both sons went to Agra District hospital. There they were asked to call family members also. Just for a check. Ultimately all of us went there.
PM: Hmm…
AK: The next day they confirmed six of us positive… both my sons, myself, my wife, my son’s wife and my sixteen year old grandson…By the way, I am 73. I was told to take all of them to Delhi.
PM: O my God!
AK: But we didn’t fear. We thought it was good we came to know. We went to Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. The Agra Doctors provided us with two ambulances. And we were not charged for that. We are grateful to them and the administration for their efforts and co-operation.
PM: You came in an ambulance!
AK: Yes. We were seated normally inside. Doctors accompanied us till Safdarjung Hospital where their doctors were waiting at the gate. They shifted us to a ward.
All six of us had separate rooms. The rooms were good; had everything. And then Sir, we stayed at the Hospital alone for 14 days. And as far as doctors are concerned,  they were very helpful and treated us well….same for staff.
Sir, actually, when they used to enter wearing their dress, one could not make out if it was a doctor or a ward boy or nurse. We would obey their instructions fully. There we did not face even one percent problem.
PM: You come across as someone with immense self confidence.
AK: Sir, I am perfect…Yes. I have earlier undergone a knee surgery also. Even then I am perfect.
PM: No, but since your entire family went through a bad time, including the young sixteen year old…
AK: And Sir, it was time for his ICSE papers! We said no…that can be thought of later. If life stays on, all papers will be managed. Not to worry.
PM Modi: That is true. Your experience in life came to be of use in this crisis and imparted confidence as well as courage to the entire family.
Ashok Kapoor: Yes, we all went there, the entire family, we supported each other and though we did not meet, we would talk on the phone. We wouldn’t meet but the doctors took complete care of us –to the maximum extent possible. We are grateful to them for their compassion. The staff nurses took full care of us.
PM Modi: Let me extend my best wishes to you and your entire family.
Ashok Kapoor: Thank you ji | Thanks | We are all very happy that I have spoken to you.
PM Modi: No! It is a pleasure for us.
Ashok Kapoor: Even then, Sir, I speak for all of us, if it is needed to go anywhere to spread awareness, or to do something, we are ready at all times.
PM Modi: No, in your own way, do it in Agra. If someone is hungry, feed him, be empathetic to the poor, and follow the rules. You must explain to the people that your family was in the clutches of this disease, but you managed to save your family by following the rules, if everyone follows the rules then the country too will be saved.
Ashok Kapoor: We sir, Modi sir, we have shot our videos, and sent them to the TV channels.
PM Modi: Good.
Ashok Kapoor: The channels have also telecast them so awareness can be spread in people and…
PM Modi: This  should be streamed in social media also so they become popular.
Ashok Kapoor: Yes. Yes. And in our colony where we live,  it is a neat and clean colony, we have told everyone that, look, we have come back from Quarantine, so do not be afraid. If anyone has a health scare, go and get it tested. And those who met should also get their tests done, and remain protected by the mercy of God. Yes sir.
PM Modi: Alright. I wish everyone all the best.
Friends, we pray for the long life of Ashok ji and his entire family. As he mentioned, without panicking, following the right steps on time,  contacting doctors on time without getting afraid and by taking proper precautions, we can defeat this pandemic. Friends, to know the capability with which we are dealing with this pandemic at the medical level, I also spoke to some doctors who are leading the front line in this battle. Their daily activity is synchronous with that of their patients. We now joined by  Dr. Nitesh Gupta from Delhi…
PM Modi: Hello doctor.
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Hello Sir
PM Modi: Namaste Niteshji, you are right there on the front, so I want to know what is the mood of the rest of your colleagues in the hospitals? Tell us how is it?
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Everyone’s mood is upbeat. Your blessings are with everyone. Whatever cause you are supporting in the given hospital or whatever we are asking for in line treatment, you are providing it all. So, we are engaged in exactly the same way just like the army battles on the border! And, our only duty is to get the patient back home after being cured.
PM Modi: You are right! This is a war-like situation and you all are managing a frontline.
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Yes sir.
PM Modi: You must also be counselling the patient along with his treatment?
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Yes sir that is the most important thing. Because the patient gets traumatized upon hearing what is happening with him. They have to be explained that there is nothing to fear and post quarantine lasting 14 days he will be fine and return home for sure!. So far we have managed to send 16 such patients home.
PM Modi: So what comes across over-all when you converse with such scared patients, are they plagued by worries?
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: They think mostly about what will happen next? What will happen now? It is because what they witness in the outside world with morbid mortality rates and wonder if the same will happen to them! So we explain to them which one of their afflictions will be cured during a particular time frame. We counsel them that their case is very mild akin to a case with a common cold and since one gets well in five-seven days, they too will be fine after a similar period of convalescence. Then we will tell them that after tests which are bound to report as negative and then they can be send home. So that’s why we visit them repeatedly after intervals of two-three-four hours, we meet them, ask about their wellbeing. They also feel comfortable throughout the day.
PM Modi: So they have their confidence restored after being scared initially?
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Initially, they are scared, but when we have counselled  and by the second or third day when they start recovering, they also start believing that they can be cured.
PM Modi: But do all the doctors are imbued with the feeling that the work of rendering the greatest service in their lives has to be shouldered by them, is this emotion shared by all of them?
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Yes, it is. We keep our team motivated to the utmost extent that there is nothing to fear, and there is no such thing that we should fear! If we observe precautions thoroughly, and explain these precautions to the patient that he is to follow, then everything will be fine.
PM Modi: Ok Doctor, a large amount of patients come to you and you are absolutely devoted to their cause. It was nice talking to you. But in this battle, I’m with you!  Keep on fighting
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: We seek your blessings. This is what we wish.
PM Modi: Many good wishes Bhaiya
Dr. Nitesh Gupta: Sir Thank you.
PM Modi: Nitish ji, plenty of plaudits to you. Due to efforts of people like you, India will surely achieve victory in the battle against Corona. I urge you to take care of yourself…take care of your loved ones…take care of your family. The world’s experience tells us that in this illness, the number of patients infected with it suddenly grows exponentially. On account of this sudden rise, we have seen the best health systems crumble. In order to ensure that India does not have to face such a situation, we have to keep trying ceaselessly. Another doctor joins us from Pune…Shriman Doctor Borse.
PM Modi: Namaste Doctor
Doctor: Namaste Namaste
PM Modi: You are working relentlessly in the true spirit of ‘Service to Mankind is service to God’. I want to speak to you today on something that will be a message for our countrymen. Firstly, a question that strikes the minds of many is when to contact doctors and when to go for the Corona test! As a doctor, you have dedicated yourself completely in the service of patients. Your words carry weight. I want to hear it from you.
Doctor: Sir, I am a Professor at B.J.Medical College, Pune. And in Pune, there is a Muncipal Corporation Hospital, named Naidu Hospital. It has a fully functional screening centre since Januray 2020. Here till date, 16 Covid -19 positive cases have been diagnosed. And out of those 16 cases, after due quarantine, isolation and treatment, 7 patients have been discharged Sir. And the remaining nine cases are also very stable and doing well. Despite the virus being inside their bodies, they are getting well; they are recovering out of the Corona virus. Here the sample size is tiny Sir…only 16 cases. But cases of the young population getting affected are coming to light. And despite that, the disease itself is not that serious a disease. It’s a mild disease and patients are successfully recovering. And those remaining 9 people are also going to be well, they are not going to deteriorate, we are keeping a watch on them on a daily basis. They are also going to be well in another 4-5 days. From people who come here as suspects; international travellers and those who come into contact with them…we take a swab… oropharyngeal and nasal. If the nasal swab report is positive, the patient is being admitted to the positive ward. If negative, we advise the patient on home quarantine, how it is to be done at home. After this advice, they are sent home.
PM Modi: What do you explain to them? While at home what aspects do you elucidate to them?
Doctor: Sir, even if one stays at home, one has to stay quarantined there. Observing  a 6 feet distance is mandatory. Secondly, one has to use a mask and wash hands very frequently. If you do not have sanitisation, you can use simple soap and water to wash hands, but you have to keep doing it frequently. And while coughing or sneezing, use a simple handkerchief to cough on, so that droplets are not able to spread, nor fall on the floor, thus preventing hand contact and further spread. We explain this Sir. The second thing is, when they are supposed to be in a home quarantine, they are not supposed to leave home at all. During the current lockdown, they ought to be home quarantined properly for a minimum of 14 days…we are informing them, this is our message to them Sir.
PM Modi: Fine Doctor, you are doing a great service and with selfless dedication…your entire team is at work. I firmly believe that all our patients there return home safely. We shall win this battle…it will be victory for the country…with the help from all of you.
Doctor: Sir we believe we shall overcome. We shall win this battle.
PM Modi: Doctor, many good wishes to you. Thank You.
Doctor: Thank you, Thank You Sir.
Friends, all these people, all these friends are persevering to the best extent possible to chase out this scourge. What they tell us is not just for us to listen to; it is to be practised in life in the truest spirit. Today when I witness the sacrifice, perseverance and dedication on part of doctors, I am reminded of the touching words of Acharya Charak while referring to doctors. And it is so visible in Doctor’s lives today! Acharya Charak had said…
Na Aatmarthan Na Api Kaamartham Atbhoot Dayam Prati
Vartate yat Chikitsaym Sa Savarma Iti Vartate
Which means: The one who strives for his patient’s well being in the spirit of service and compassion, with no desire, monetary or otherwise, is the greatest Doctor.
Friends, today I salute the embodiment of humanity…the Nurse. The selfless spirit of service with which you perform your duty is beyond compare. It’s a coincidence that the world is celebrating year 2020 as the International year of the Nurse and Midwife. This goes back 200 years ago, i.e. 1820, the year that is associated with the birth of Florence Nightingale who lent a new identity, a new paradigm to the term ‘Service to humanity’ and the field of Nursing, taking it to newer heights. Dedicated to the spirit of service of every nurse in the world, this year has come as a challenging examination for the entire Nursing community…I believe, all of you will not only clear the exam successfully, you will also save many lives.
We are able to fight a battle on such a massive scale, only on account of the zeal and grit of  frontline warriors like you…Be you a Doctor, a nurse, a para medic, Aasha, an ANM worker, sanitation worker, the country is also concerned about your health. Keeping that in mind , for around 20 lakhs colleagues from these fields, the government has announced a health insurance cover of upto Rs 50 lakhs, so that in this battle, you can lead the country with greater self confidence.
My dear countrymen, in this battle against Corona virus we have many examples of real heroes in the society. People who are at the forefront even in these conditions. On the Narendra Modi app, the Namo app, Niranjan Sudhaakar Hebbaale of BengaLuuru has written, that such people are daily life heroes. And that is quite right too. These are people due to whom our daily life runs smoothly.
Just imagine, if the water in your taps runs dry for just a day, or there is a sudden power outage in your house. At that time, it is these daily life heroes who banish our troubles. Think about the small retail store in your neighbourhood. In these troubled times, he too is taking a great risk. After all, for whom? Isn’t it because he wants to ensure that you do not face any difficulty in buying essential goods? Similar to that, think about those drivers and workers, who are continuing to work ceaselessly, so that the nation’s supply chain of essential goods is not disrupted. You might have noticed that the government has kept the banking services open. And those working in the banking sector are there at your service – with full commitment and dedication – leading us in this fight. These services are not trivial at a time like this. We cannot thank these bank personnel enough for their service. Many of our friends are engaged with e-commerce companies as delivery personnel. These people are continuing delivering grocery even in these trying times.
Just think, as you watch television during this lock down, using the phone and internet even while being home bound, someone is working hard to ensure that these services continue uninterrupted. During this time, many of you are able to make digital payments with ease, many people are working hard to facilitate that. These are the people who are bearing the burden of the country’s work during this lock down. On behalf of all countrymen, today I wish to express my gratitude to all these people, and request them, that they follow all the safety precautions, take care of themselves and their family members.
My dear countrymen, I have come to know of some instances, that some of those people who were suspected to have corona virus and asked to stay in home quarantine, are being ill-treated by others. I am greatly pained to learn of these instances. This is very unfortunate. We need to understand that in the current circumstances, we need to ensure social distance, not human or emotional distance. These people are not criminals. They are merely suspected to be infected with the virus. These people have isolated and quarantined themselves to protect other people from getting infected. At many places, people have taken
their responsibilities very seriously. They have quarantined themselves even when they were asymptomatic. They did so because they had travelled abroad recently and were being doubly cautious. They wanted to ensure that nobody else
got infected by this virus. So when people are behaving so responsibly, it is unfair to ill-treat them. On the contrary, they need to be shown sympathy and cooperation.
Social distancing is the most effective way of fighting against corona virus. But we have to understand that social distancing does not mean ending social interaction. Actually, this is the time to give a new lease of life to all your existing social relationships. To energise these relationships. In a way, this time teaches us to reduce emotional distance and increase social distance. Yashvardhan from Kota have written on the Namo app, that they are increasing family bonding during the lock down. They are playing cricket and board games with kids; p reparing new dishes in the kitchen. Nirupama Harsheya from Jabalpur writes on the Namo app, that she finally got an opportunity to fulfil her wish to make a quilt. On top of that she is also fulfilling her gardening hobby. I also happened to read the posts of Pareekshit from Raipur, Aaryaman from Gurugram and Suraj from Jharkhand, and they have discussed about having an e-reunion with their school friends. Their idea is very interesting. It’s possible that you too might not have gotten a chance to talk to your school and college mates for decades. You too can try out this idea. Pratyush of Bhubaneswar and Vasudha of Kolkata have mentioned that they are reading books that they had hitherto not been able to read. I also saw on social media, that many people took out musical instruments like table  and Veena that were lying unused for years– and started practising on them. You too can do that.
That will not only give you the joy of music, but also take you on a trip down the memory lane. In this crisis, you have got a rare opportunity to not only connect with yourself but also with your passion. You will also get an opportunity to connect with your old friends and with your family.
Shashi ji from Roorke has asked me on the Namo App – what do I do for my fitness during the lock down? How do I observe the Navaraatri fast in these circumstances? Let me reiterate, that although I have urged you to
avoid stepping out of your houses, I have also given you an opportunity to take a look inwards at yourself. This is your chance, don’t go out, but go inside, try to know yourself. As far as the navaraatri fast is concerned, that is between me and my faith and the supreme power. As regards fitness, I think that will be quite a lengthy topic, so what I’ll do is, I’ll upload some videos on this topic on the social media. You can surely see those videos on the Namo app. What I do, possibly, can aid and inspire some of you. But do remember, that I am not a fitness expert, I am also not a yoga teacher. I am merely a practitioner. I do concede however, that some yogaasanaas have greatly benefited me. It’s possible that some of these tips might help you too during the lock down.
Friends, this battle against corona is unprecedented as well as challenging. Hence the decisions being taken during this time are unheard of in the history of the world. The steps being taken by Indians to stop the spread of corona, the efforts that we are currently making, will ensure that India conquers this corona pandemic. The determination and restraint of each Indian will also aid in facing this crisis. In addition, our sympathy for the poor should also be far greater. Our humanity stems from the fact that whenever we see a poor or hungry person, we first try and feed him or her in this time of crisis. We should think of their needs and India can do this. These are a part of our values and culture.
My dear countrymen, today every Indian is confined to the home, to ensure his or her own safety, but in the times to come, the very same Indian will tear down all walls on the road to our progress and take the country forward. Stay at home with your family, be careful and safe, we need to win this battle. And we will win. We will meet in Man ki baat again next month. By then we should have overcome this crisis – with this hope, and this wish, I thank you all.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
All of you are tuned into this episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat ‘during the lockdown. The number of suggestions and phone calls for this episode is many times the usual. Matters close to your heart; your own Mann Ki Baat, comprising a number of issues has reached out to me. I’ve tried to the best possible extent to read them, listen to them. One has come to know of certain aspects which do not get noticed during the course of this flurry of exigencies. I wish to touch upon and share a few of those aspects with our countrymen in this ‘Mann ki Baat’, taking place amidst a battle.
Friends,
India’s fight against Corona is people-driven, in the truest sense of the term. In India it is the people who are fighting the Corona; it is you who are putting up a fight …..along with the people, the government and the administration are fighting as well. A vast country such as India, with its proactive endeavor on the path of development is fighting a decisive battle against poverty. This is the only medium it possesses to fight the Corona and triumph over it. And we are fortunate that today the whole country; each and every citizen of the country; every person is a soldier in this battle; nay, leading the battle. Cast a glance anywhere, you’ll notice that India’s fight is people driven…at a time when the whole world is trying to extricate itself from the clutches of this pandemic. In future when it will be dwelt upon in hindsight; when ways and means will be reflected upon, I do believe that India’s people driven fight will also be touched upon. Today at each and every place, in neighbourhood lanes, people have come forward to help each other. From food for the underprivileged, arranging rations, ensuring lockdown, arrangements in hospitals to manufacturing medical equipments indigenously…the entire country is marching ahead together in the same direction, towards a single common objective. Collective applause,
Thaalis
, lamps, candles are reflective of a rising sentiment that has inspired countrymen to be altruistic, motivating each and everyone on the way. From metropolises to villages, it comes across as a ’Mahayagya’ being performed in the realm of our national ethos where every individual is eager to contribute. A case in point are our farmer brothers and sisters – on the one hand , they are toiling day and night amidst the scourge of the pandemic; on the other displaying due concern to ensure that none in the country goes to bed hungry. Everyone is putting up a fight,  as per one’s capacity and ability. There are some who are waiving off rent; there are others depositing entire amounts received through prizes and pension in PM CARES. Some are donating vegetables grown on farms; others are feeding  a multitude of the under privileged. Some are making masks; at places, our construction workers are whitewashing and painting schools meant for their quarantine stay.
Friends,
The feeling that emanates from the core of your heart when you help others , that touching, benevolent emotion takes the form of inner strength in India’s fight against Corona, making it people driven in every sense of the term. And we have seen in recent years in our country, this altruistic bent of mind is gaining strength…it could be in the form of crores of people giving up Gas Subsidy, lakhs of senior citizen leaving Railway Subsidy, leading the ‘Swachcha Bharat Abhiyan’ or getting toilets constructed …there are innumerable examples. All these are reflective of the fact that we, our minds and hearts have been intertwined along a common strong thread…it has inspired us to do something for the country unitedly.
My dear countrymen,
With utmost humility and deepest respect, I bow to this sentiment displayed by a 130 crore countrymen. To facilitate your selfless endeavor towards our country, as per your inclination and time, the government has come up with a Digital Platform …it is called
covidwarriors.gov.in
… I repeat-
covidwarriors.gov.in
. Through the medium of this platform, the government has linked volunteers of social organizations, representatives of civil society and local administration with each other. It did not take long for 1.25 crore people to be part of this portal. They comprise Doctors, Nurses, ASHA-ANM workers, our friends from NCC and NSS, professionals from myriad fields…all of them have made the platform their own. These people are of immense help at the local level in preparing Crisis Management Plans and implementing them. You too can join covidwarriors.gov.in to be a Covid warrior and serve the country.
Friends,
Every adverse situation, every battle leaves in its wake a worthwhile lesson or two; a moral. It paves the way for further possibilities, shaping the course for newer goals. The strength of the resolve the countrymen have displayed during the crisis has led to the beginning of a new transformation too in India. Our businesses, offices, educational institutions, our medical sector are rapidly advancing towards new operational changes. On the technology front, it actually seems every innovator in the country is coming up anew with something or the other amid emerging situations.
We are experiencing the results of the entire country in unison as a team. Today, the Central Government, State Governments; each and every department and institution are working hand in hand for relief at full speed. People working in the aviation sector, Railway employees are working day and night to alleviate hurdles confronting our countrymen.. Many of you might be aware of a special campaign called ‘Lifeline Udan’ undertaken for ensuring supply of medicines to every corner of the country. Within a short span of time, our colleagues clocked a flight distance of three lakh kilometers, delivering over five hundred tons of medical supplies to you in the farthest corners of the country. Similarly our colleagues in the Railways are working relentlessly during the lockdown, so that the common man throughout the country does not have to face the shortage of essential commodities.
For this, Indian Railways is running more than 100 parcel trains on close to 60 routes. Similarly,  our postal department personnel are playing a critical role in ensuring medical supplies. All these colleagues of ours are Corona Warriors in the truest sense.
Friends,
Money is being directly transferred into the accounts of the poor, as part of the Pradhan Mantri Gareeb Kalyan Package. Old age pension has been started. The poor are being provided facilities like free of cost gas cylinders and rations for three months. In all these activities, different government departments and banking sector personnel are working together round the clock as a team. And I would also like to commend our state governments for playing a very proactive role in dealing with this pandemic. The responsibilities being borne by local administrations and state governments are critical in the fight against Corona. Their hard work is worthy of commendation.
My dear countrymen,
Medical services personnel across the country have expressed satisfaction with the ordinance that has been issued recently. This ordinance provides for stringent punishment for those harassing or injuring or indulging in violence against Corona warriors. This step was critical to ensure the safety of our doctors, nurses, para-medical staff, community health workers and all such personnel who are working round the clock to ensure a Corona-free India.
My dear countrymen,
We feel that during the fight against this pandemic, we have been accorded an opportunity to look at our lives, our society and the happenings around us, with a fresh perspective. There is a far-reaching change in the viewpoint of the society. Today we realise the importance of each person who is connected with our lives. Whether they are household helps, common workers who fulfill our various needs or personnel working in shops nearby – we are realising what a major role they play in our lives. Similarly, personnel delivering essential services, labourers working in marketplaces, the auto rickshaw drivers in our neighbourhood – today we realise how difficult our lives can be without them.
These days we regularly see on the social media that during the lock down, people are not only remembering these colleagues and helping them with their needs, but are also writing about them with great respect. Today we see pictures coming in from all corners where sanitation workers are being showered with petals. Earlier, you probably did not even notice their contribution. Doctors, cleaning staff and other such services personnel, and even our police organisations are being seen in a new light by the common people. Earlier when we thought of the police, we were engulfed only by negative thoughts. Today our police personnel are ensuring that food and medicines reach the poor and the needy. Just as the police is stepping forward to help, a humane and sensitive aspect of policing has manifested itself before us, and has touched our hearts to the very core. This is a time when common folk are connecting with the police at an emotional level. Our police personnel are treating this as an opportunity for serving the public. And I am fully confident that such incidents can, in the times to come, bring about a very positive change, and we must never tar this positivity with hues of negativity.
Friends,
We often hear three words – nature, perversion and culture – if you see these words together and see the intent behind these words, you will find a new key to understanding life. If we talk of human nature, ‘this is mine’, ‘I am using this’ – such a mindset is considered quite natural. Nobody seems to have any objection to this. We can refer to this as ‘nature’.
But that ‘which doesn’t belong to me’, ‘which is not rightfully mine’, and I forcibly snatch it from another person and use, can be referred to as a kind of perversion or degeneration. Beyond these two i.e. nature and perversion, if a cultured mind rises above, in thought and action, then ‘culture’ manifests itself.
When something that is rightfully yours, something that you earned through hard work, something that is essential for you – be it little or more- without bothering about such things, you are willing to see the other person’s need, to look beyond your self interest, and willing to share what is rightfully yours with another person – THAT reflects ‘culture’. Friends, in critical times, these qualities are put to the test.
You would have seen in the past few days, that India has taken some decisions while keeping true to its culture and ethos – and upholding our cultural heritage. During this crisis, the world – including rich and prosperous nations – is facing a shortage of medicines. In these times, even if India does not provide medicines to the world, no one would have faulted us. Every country would understand that obviously India would prioritise the lives of its own citizens. But friends, India went beyond nature and degeneration and took a decision. We took a decision in keeping with our culture. While we stepped up efforts to fulfill India’s needs, we also paid heed to the cry of help that came from other parts of the world to save humanity. We undertook the task of providing medical supplies to the needy across the world, and have successfully completed this humanitarian task. Today when I speak to heads of state of various countries on phone, they make sure to express gratitude to the people of India. When they say, ‘Thank you India, Thank you people of India’, we feel greater pride in our country. In the same vein, people across the world are paying special attention to the importance of India’s Ayurveda and Yoga. Just look at the social media… how people everywhere are discussing India’s Ayurveda and Yoga to boost immunity. I am sure you all are following the Corona-related protocol to boost immunity suggested by the Ayush ministry. Warm water, decoction and other guidelines issued by Ayush ministry, would be very helpful for you if you include it in your daily routine.
Friends,
It has been our misfortune that we always refuse to acknowledge our own strengths and glorious traditions. But when another country of the world, says the very same thing, on the basis of evidence based research, when they teach us our own formula, we instantly accept their assertions. Possibly this is largely due to our hundreds of year long phase of bondage. Due to this, often we fail to realise our own strengths. Our self confidence wavers. That’s why instead of presenting our traditional principles with evidence based research, we just ignore them and consider them inferior. India’s young generation will now have to take up this challenge. Just as the world has happily accepted Yoga, the world will surely also accept our ages old Ayurvedic principles. Of course, the youth will have to resolve to do this and explain these principles to the world in a scientific language, so that they understand it.
Friends,
I must say, many positive changes are organically making their way into our work culture, our lifestyle and our daily habits. You all must have felt how this crisis has made us more aware and heightened our consciousness on various subjects. The effect that is most visible around us, is wearing a mask and covering the face. In the changed paradigm due to Corona, masks are becoming a part of our lives. We were never used to seeing so many people around us in masks, but we are now getting used to that reality. However, it does not mean that all those wearing a mask are sick. And when I talk of masks, I am reminded of something. You might also remember this. There was a time when in many parts of our country, if we saw someone buying fruits in our neighbourhood, we would enquire about their health. So – buying fruits meant illness. That was the notion back then. But times have changed and this paradigm too has shifted. Similarly we are going to see a change in attitude towards masks as well. Mark my words, masks will now become a symbol of cultured society. If you want to save yourself and others from disease, you will have to wear a mask. And my simple suggestion to every one is to use a Gumchha or a light towel to cover the face.
Friends,
Another awareness that has come about in our society is that people now understand the damage that can be caused by spitting in public places. It had been a part of our bad habits that we would spit just about anywhere. This presents a serious challenge both to cleanliness and to health. Although if we look at it, we have always been aware of this problem, but this problem just refused to get addressed by our society. But it’s time now to get rid of this problem once and for all. As they say, ‘better late than never’. So even though we have been late in addressing it, but now we must eradicate the spitting habit. These things will not only boost our basic hygiene levels, but also help in preventing the spread of the Corona infection.
My dear countrymen,
It is a happy coincidence that, today when I am sharing my ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with you, it also happens to be the holy festival of Akshaya-Tritiya’.
Friends,
‘Kshay’ in Hindi means destruction but ‘Akshay’ means that which is indestructible or which never ends or is forever. We all celebrate this festival every year in our homes, but this year it bears a special significance for us. In the present troubled times, this is a day that reminds us that our soul, our life-force, is ‘Akshay’. This day reminds us that no matter how many difficulties block our path, no matter how many disasters are wreaked upon us and no matter how many contagions have to be faced – the human spirit of fighting and battling them are inexhaustible. It is also believed that this is the day when the Pandavas got the Akshaya-Patra through the blessings of Lord Krishna and Lord Suryadev.
Akshaya Patra was the mythical vessel which always remained replete with food! Our farmers are our
Annadata
or providers who work hard in adverse conditions, for the country, for all of us, imbued with this spirit. It is due to their hard work, that today the country has vast reserves of food grains for all of us and for the poor. On this day of Akshaya Tritiya, we should give a thought about the preservation of our environment, forests, rivers and the entire ecosystem, which play an important role in our lives. If we want to remain bestowed with ‘renewable’ resources then we must first ensure that our earth remains ever abundant.
Did you know that this festival of Akshaya-Tritiya also provides us an occasion to realize the strength of charity – Power of giving! Whatever we give away wholeheartedly is what actually matters! It is not important what and how much we give. In this period of crisis, our small efforts can become a huge support for many people around us. Friends, this is a very holy day in Jain traditions as it happens to be an important day in the life of the first Tirthankara Lord Rishabhdev. The followers of Jainism celebrate it as a festival and hence it is quite easy to understand why on this day people like to initiate an auspicious project. Since today is the day to initiate something anew, cannot we all take a resolve to make our earth bountiful and imperishable through our efforts? Friends, today also marks the birth anniversary of Lord Basaveshwara. It has been my good fortune that I have had the opportunity to learn and connect with reminiscences of Lord Basaveshwara and his messages repeatedly. I extend many felicitations to all the followers of Lord Basaveshwara in our country and the world on his birth anniversary.
Friends,
The holy month of Ramazan too has begun. The last time when Ramazan was celebrated, no one had imagined that we would be facing such a huge predicament this time around. But, now that this trouble has come to plague the entire world, it gives us an opportunity to mark this Ramazan as an icon of restraint, goodwill, sensitivity and service. This time, we should pray more than ever before so that prior to the celebration of Eid the world is rid of Corona and we celebrate Eid with enthusiasm and gaiety like earlier times. I am confident that during these days of Ramazan, by adhering to the guidelines of the local administration, we will reinforce our fight against Corona. It is still very important to follow the rules of physical distancing in the streets, in the markets and in the mohallas or colonies. Today, I also express my gratitude to all those community leaders who are making people aware about the two yards distancing and not going out of the houses.
In fact, Corona has changed the manner of celebrating festivals all over the world including India .It has changed the ways of their observance. Recently, we observed many festivals such as Bihu, Baisakhi, Puthandu, Vishu and Odia New Year. We saw how people celebrated these festivals staying indoors, with great simplicity while wishing well for society. In ordinary circumstances they used to celebrate these festivals with full zeal and enthusiasm with friends and families. people used to come out of the house and share joy. But this time, everyone observed restraint, following the rules of lockdown. We have seen that this time our Christian brethren too celebrated Easter within the confines of their homes. It is imperative at present to fulfill this responsibility of ours towards society and our nation.  Only then will we be able to prevent the spread of corona… We will be able to defeat a pandemic like Corona.
My dear countrymen,
In the midst of this pandemic, as a member of your family, and all of you happen to be my family members, it is also my responsibility to touch upon certain points and offer some suggestions. To my countrymen, I urge , let us not at all get caught in the trap of over-confidence, let us not harbor a feeling that if corona has not yet reached our city, our village, our street or our office, it is not going to reach now. See! Never make such a mistake! The experience of the world is narrating a lot to us! And, here in our country we are always reminded again and again – ‘Where caution has been lowered, the accident has happened!’ Remember, our ancestors have guided us very well in dealing with such situations. Our ancestors have said –
Agni: Shesham Rina: Shesham,
Vyadhi: SheshamTathaivacha.
Punah: Punah: Pravardheta,
Tasmaat Shesham na Kaaryet ||
That is, Fire, Debt and Illness, if taken lightly, grow again at the first opportunity,  assuming dangerous proportions- so it is important to treat them completely! Therefore, in over-enthusiasm, there should be no negligence at the local level or  elsewhere. We will always have to remain cautious. And, I will reiterate, “Maintain  a distance of two yards and keep yourself healthy!” or “
Do Gaz Doori, Bahut Hai Zaroori
!”. Wishing all of you the best of health, I conclude my thoughts. I also wish that when we meet during the next episode of Mann Ki Baat, may some news of escape from the clutches of this pandemic and mankind emerging out of this predicament greet us from all over the world!
Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar! Our Mann ki Baat too has not remained untouched by the effect of Corona. The last time I spoke to you through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ , passenger train services, busses and flights had come to a standstill. This time around much has resumed-Shramik special trains are operational; other special trains too have begun. With utmost precautions, flights have resumed; industry too is returning to normalcy; thus, opening up a major segment of the economy. In such a scenario, we need to be even more alert and careful. Whether it’s the mandatory two yards distancing, wearing face masks or staying at home to the best extent possible, there should be no laxity on our part in complete adherence.
The battle against Corona is being fiercely waged in the country through collective efforts. When we glance at the world, we can actually experience the magnitude of the achievements of the people of India. Our population itself is many times that of most countries. The challenges facing the country too are of a different kind, yet Corona did not spread as fast as it did in other countries of the world. The mortality rate of corona too is a lot less in our country. All of us deeply regret the loss that we had to undergo. But whatever we have been able to save is a result of the collective resolve of the country. In a country as big as ours, everyone is determined to put up a fight; the entire campaign is people driven.
Friends,
in this fight, besides the resolve of our countrymen, the other biggest strength is their spirit of service. In fact, during this pandemic, we, the people of India have visibly proved that the notion of service and sacrifice is not just our ideal; it is a way of life in India. We are familiar with the dictum- Sewa Paramo Dharmah; service is a joy in itself….service is a satisfaction in itself. You must have observed that a person devoted to the service of others never suffers from any kind of depression or tension. Every moment of his life and attitude towards life exudes immense self-confidence, positivity and vivacity.
Friends,
I have often refered to the spirit of service on part of our doctors, nursing staff, sanitation workers, police personnel and media persons. I have touched upon this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ too. There are innumerable people who are willing to give their all in the service of others. One such gentleman is K.C. Mohan of Tamilnadu. Shri Mohan ji runs a salon in Madurai. Through sheer hard work, he had saved five lakh rupees for his daughter’s education. But he spent the entire amount in the service of the needy and the underprivileged in these difficult times. Similarly, Gautam Das ji of Agartala whose only means of sustenance is plying a handcart is feeding the needy by buying rice and pulses out of savings from his daily earnings. I have come to know of a similar example from Pathankot, Punjab. Divyang Raju through a small investment raised with help from others got over three thousand masks made and distributed them. In these difficult times, Brother Raju has arranged for feeding of around a hundred families.
Numerous stories of perseverance of women’s self help groups are coming to the fore from all corners of the country. In villages and small towns, our sisters and daughters are making thousands of masks on a daily basis. Many social organizations too are helping them in this endeavor.
Friends,
one is getting to see and hear of many such examples day by day. There are many people who are conveying their efforts to me through the NAMO app and other media. Many a time, on account of paucity of time I am unable to name a lot of people, organizations and institutions. I appreciate all such people who are helping others with a spirit of service….. I respect them and express my gratitude to them from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen,
one more thing that has touched my heart is innovation at this moment of crisis. A multitude of countrymen from villages and cities, from small scale traders to start ups, our labs are devising even new ways of fighting against Corona; with novel innovations.
The example of Rajendra Yadav of Nasik is very interesting. Rajendra ji is a farmer from Satna village in Nasik. To protect his village from the spread of Corona, he has devised a sanitization machine attached to his tractor and this innovation is performing very effectively. Similarly I was observing numerous photographs on social media. Many shopkeepers in order to adhere to the two yard distancing have installed big pipe lines in their shops. Merchandise is released from one end and collected at the other end by the customer. Meanwhile teachers and students have come together with myriad innovations in the field of education. Online classes, video classes are being innovated in different ways.
Work being done in our labs on Corona vaccine is being keenly observed by the world and we are hopeful too. In order to change circumstances, besides resolve, a lot depends on innovation too. The journey of the human race, spanning thousands of years has reached this modern phase on account of continuous innovation. Thus, these special innovations form the firm basis of our victory over the pandemic.
Friends,
the path of our fight against Corona goes a long way. It is a calamity, a scourge that does not have an antidote in the entire world; there is no prior experience on that. Amid this scenario, we are facing newer challenges and consequent hardships. This is the situation of every Corona affected country in the world- India is no exception. There is no stratum in our country unaffected by the difficulties caused by the affliction-the most gravely affected by the crisis are the underprivileged labourers and workers. Their agony, their pain, their ordeal cannot be expressed in words. Who amongst us cannot understand and feel what they and their families are going through! All of us are trying to share their distress; the torment…..the entire country is doing that. Our railway personnel are at it day and night. From the centre, states, to local governance bodies, everybody is toiling around the clock. The way our railway men are relentlessly engaged, they too are front line Corona Warriors. Safely transporting lakhs of labourers in trains and busses, caring for their food, arranging for their quarantine in every district, testing, check up and treatment is an ongoing process on a very large scale. But friends, the current scenario that we are witnessing is an eye opener to happenings in the past to the country; it is also an opportunity for scrutiny and lessons for the future. Today, the distress our workforce is undergoing is representative of that of the country’s eastern region. The very region which possesses the capacity to be the country’s growth engine, whose workforce possesses the capability and the might to take the country to greater heights…the eastern region needs development. It is only the development of the eastern region that can lead to a balanced economic development of the country. Ever since the country offered me the opportunity to serve, we have accorded priority to the development of eastern India. In the last few years, much has been done in this direction which gives me inner satisfaction. And now, considering the migrant labourers, the need of the hour is devising a new solution – paradigm….we are ceaselessly taking steps in that direction. For example, at places skill mapping of labourers is being carried out; at other places start ups are engaged in doing the same…the establishment of a migration commission is being deliberated upon. Besides that, recent decisions taken by the Central government have opened up vast possibilities of village employment, self employment and small scale industry. The objective of these decisions is finding solutions to the situation, for the sake of a self-reliant India. Had our villages, towns, districts and states been self-reliant, problems facing us would not have been of such a magnitude as is evident today. But moving from darkness toward light is a human trait. Amidst multiple challenges, it gives me joy to see extensive deliberation in the country on Aatmnirbhar Bharat, a self-reliant India. People now have begun to take it as a movement of their own. Our countrymen are picking up the reins of leadership of this mission in their own hands. Many people have mentioned the fact that they have made complete lists of the products being manufactured in their vicinity. These people are now buying only these local products, promoting “Vocal for Local”. In order to encourage “Make in India” everyone is expressing one’s own resolve.
One of our friends from Bihar, Shriman Himanshu has written to me on the Namo App that he dreams of the day when India reduces imoports to the bare minimum…be it the import of Petrol, Diesel, fuels, electronic items, urea or even edible oils. I understand his sentiments. There are many products that find their way into the country from outside resulting in wasteful expenditure on part of the honest Tax payers. Their substitutes can easily be manufactured in India.
Sudeep from Assam has written to me that he trades in local bamboo products crafted by women. He has decided that in the next two years, he will transform his bamboo products into a global brand. I firmly believe that the Atmanirbhar Bharat campaign will take the country to greater heights in this decade.
My dear countrymen,
during the ongoing Corona crisis, I spoke to mnay world leaders. I would like to share a secret today- I’ve observed that during deliberations between world leaders; a lot of interest is evinced in Yog and Ayurved. Many leaders asked me if Yog and Ayurved could be of help in this calamitous period of Corona.
Friends,
‘International Yoga Day’ is arriving soon. As ‘Yoga’ is getting integrated with people’s lives, the awareness about their health, is also continuously on the rise among them. During the present Corona pandemic it is being observed from Hollywood to Haridwar that, while staying at home, people are paying serious attention to ‘Yoga’. People everywhere want to know more about ‘Yoga’ and along with it ‘Ayurveda’ and adopt it as a way of life. Many people, who have never practiced yoga, have either joined online yoga classes or are also learning yoga through online videos. Truly , ‘Yoga’ is good for community, immunity and unity!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar! Our Mann ki Baat too has not remained untouched by the effect of Corona. The  last time I spoke to you through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ , passenger train services, busses and flights had come to a standstill. This time around much has resumed-Shramik special trains are operational; other special trains too have begun. With utmost precautions, flights have resumed; industry too is returning to normalcy; thus, opening up a major segment of the economy. In such a scenario, we need to be even more alert and careful. Whether it’s the mandatory two yards distancing, wearing face masks or staying at home to the best extent possible, there should be no laxity on our part in complete adherence.
The battle against Corona is being fiercely waged in the country through collective efforts. When we glance at the world, we can actually experience the magnitude of the achievements of the people of India. Our population itself is many times that of most countries. The challenges facing the country too are of a different kind, yet Corona did not spread as fast as it did in other countries of the world. The mortality rate of corona too is a lot less in our country. All of us deeply regret the loss that we had to undergo. But whatever we have been able to save is a result of the collective resolve of the country. In a country as big as ours, everyone is determined to put up a fight; the entire campaign is people driven.
Friends,
in this fight, besides the resolve of our countrymen, the other biggest strength is their spirit of service. In fact, during this pandemic, we, the people of India have visibly proved that the notion of service and sacrifice is not just our ideal; it is a way of life in India. We are familiar with the dictum-
Sewa Paramo Dharmah
; service is a joy in itself….service is a satisfaction in itself. You must have observed that a person devoted to the service of others never suffers from any kind of depression or tension. Every moment of his life and attitude towards life exudes immense self-confidence, positivity and vivacity.
Friends,
I have often refered to the spirit of service on part of our doctors, nursing staff, sanitation workers, police personnel and media persons. I have touched upon this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ too. There are innumerable people who are willing to give their all in the service of others. One such gentleman is K.C. Mohan of Tamilnadu. Shri Mohan ji runs a salon in Madurai. Through sheer hard work, he had saved five lakh rupees for his daughter’s education. But he spent the entire amount in the service of the needy and the underprivileged in these difficult times. Similarly, Gautam Das ji of Agartala whose only means of sustenance is plying a handcart is feeding the needy by buying rice and pulses out of savings from his daily earnings. I have come to know of a similar example from Pathankot, Punjab. Divyang Raju through a small investment raised with help from others got over three thousand masks made and distributed them. In these difficult times, Brother Raju has arranged for feeding of around a hundred families.
Numerous stories of perseverance of women’s self help groups are coming to the fore from all corners of the country. In villages and small towns, our sisters and daughters are making thousands of masks on a daily basis. Many social organizations too are helping them in this endeavor.
Friends,
one is getting to see and hear of many such examples day by day. There are many people who are conveying their efforts to me through the NAMO app and other media. Many a time, on account of paucity of time I am unable to name a lot of people, organizations and institutions. I appreciate all such people who are helping others with a spirit of service….. I respect them and express my gratitude to them from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen,
one more thing that has touched my heart is innovation at this moment of crisis. A multitude of countrymen from villages and cities, from small scale traders to start ups, our labs are devising even new ways of fighting against Corona; with novel innovations.
The example of Rajendra Yadav of Nasik is very interesting. Rajendra ji is a farmer from Satna village in Nasik. To protect his village from the spread of Corona, he has devised a sanitization machine attached to his tractor and this innovation is performing very effectively. Similarly I was observing numerous photographs on social media. Many shopkeepers in order to adhere to the two yard distancing have installed big pipe lines in their shops. Merchandise is released from one end and collected at the other end by the customer. Meanwhile teachers and students have come together with myriad innovations in the field of education. Online classes, video classes are being innovated in different ways.
Work being done in our labs on Corona vaccine is being keenly observed by the world and we are hopeful too. In order to change circumstances, besides resolve, a lot depends on innovation too. The journey of the human race, spanning thousands of years has reached this modern phase on account of continuous innovation. Thus, these special innovations form the firm basis of our victory over the pandemic.
Friends,
the path of our fight against Corona goes a long way. It is a calamity, a scourge that does not have an antidote in the entire world; there is no prior experience on that. Amid this scenario, we are facing newer challenges and consequent hardships. This is the situation of every Corona affected country in the world- India is no exception. There is no stratum in our country unaffected by the difficulties caused by the affliction-the most gravely affected by the crisis are the underprivileged labourers and workers. Their agony, their pain, their ordeal cannot be expressed in words. Who amongst us cannot understand and feel what they and their families are going through! All of us are trying to share their distress; the torment…..the entire country is doing that. Our railway personnel are at it day and night. From the centre, states, to local governance bodies, everybody is toiling around the clock. The way our railway men are relentlessly engaged, they too are front line Corona Warriors. Safely transporting lakhs of labourers in trains and busses, caring for their food, arranging for their quarantine in every district, testing, check up and treatment is an ongoing process on a very large scale. But friends, the current scenario that we are witnessing is an eye opener to happenings in the past to the country; it is also an opportunity for scrutiny and lessons for the future. Today, the distress our workforce is undergoing is representative of that of the country’s eastern region. The very region which possesses the capacity to be the country’s growth engine, whose workforce possesses the capability and the might to take the country to greater heights…the eastern region needs development. It is only the development of the eastern region that can lead to a balanced economic development of the country. Ever since the country offered me the opportunity to serve, we have accorded priority to the development of eastern India. In the last few years, much has been done in this direction which gives me inner satisfaction. And now, considering the migrant labourers, the need of the hour is devising a new solution – paradigm….we are ceaselessly taking steps in that direction. For example, at places skill mapping of labourers is being carried out; at other places start ups are engaged in doing the same…the establishment of a migration commission is being deliberated upon. Besides that, recent decisions taken by the Central government have opened up vast possibilities of village employment, self employment and small scale industry. The objective of these decisions is finding solutions to the situation, for the sake of a self-reliant India. Had our villages, towns, districts and states been self-reliant, problems facing us would not have been of such a magnitude as is evident today. But moving from darkness toward light is a human trait. Amidst multiple challenges, it gives me joy to see extensive deliberation in the country on
Aatmnirbhar Bharat
, a self-reliant India. People now have begun to take it as a movement of their own. Our countrymen are picking up the reins of leadership of this mission in their own hands. Many people have mentioned the fact that they have made complete lists of the products being manufactured in their vicinity. These people are now buying only these local products, promoting “Vocal for Local”. In order to encourage “Make in India” everyone is expressing one’s own resolve.
One of our friends from Bihar, Shriman Himanshu has written to me on the Namo App that he dreams of the day when India reduces imoports to the bare minimum…be it the import of Petrol, Diesel, fuels, electronic items, urea or even edible oils. I understand his sentiments. There are many products that find their way into the country from outside resulting in wasteful expenditure on part of the honest Tax payers. Their substitutes can easily be manufactured in India.
Sudeep from Assam has written to me that he trades in local bamboo products crafted by women. He has decided that in the next two years, he will transform his bamboo products into a global brand. I firmly believe that the
Atmanirbhar Bharat
campaign will take the country to greater heights in this decade.
My dear countrymen,
during the ongoing Corona crisis, I spoke to mnay world leaders. I would like to share a secret today- I’ve observed that during deliberations between world leaders; a lot of interest is evinced in Yog and Ayurved. Many leaders asked me if Yog and Ayurved could be of help in this calamitous period of Corona.
Friends,
‘International Yoga Day’ is arriving soon. As ‘Yoga’ is getting integrated with people’s lives, the awareness about their health, is also continuously on the rise among them. During the present Corona pandemic it is being observed from Hollywood to Haridwar that, while staying at home, people are paying serious attention to ‘Yoga’. People everywhere want to know more about ‘Yoga’ and along with it ‘Ayurveda’ and adopt it as a way of life. Many people, who have never practiced yoga, have either joined online yoga classes or are also learning yoga through online videos. Truly , ‘Yoga’ is good for community, immunity and unity!
Friends,
during the present Corona pandemic, Yoga becomes all the more important, because this virus affects our respiratory system maximally. In yoga, there are many types of Pranayama that strengthen the respiratory system; the beneficial effects of which we have been witnessing for long. These are time tested techniques, which have their own distinct significance. Most people will be familiar with ‘Kapalbhati’ and ‘Anulom-Vilom  Pranayam’. But there are many other forms of Pranayamas like ‘Bhastrika’, ‘Sheetali’, ‘Bhramari’ etc, which also have many benefits. By the way, the Ministry of AYUSH has also done a unique experiment this time to increase the practice of yoga in your life. The Ministry of AYUSH has started its International Video Blog competition entitled ‘My Life, My Yoga’.
Not only Indians, but people from all over the world can participate in this competition. To participate in this International Video Blog competition, you will have to make a three-minute video and upload it. In this video, you have to show performing Yoga, or Asana, that you usually do and also tell about the changes that have taken place in your life through yoga. I request all of you too participate in this competition, and through this novel way, be a part of the International Yoga Day also.
Friends,
in our country, for decades, crores of impoverished citizens have been living their lives engulfed by the constant concern- what will happen if they fall ill….to seek medical treatment or worry about earning bread for the family? Realizing this distress, the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme was launched about one and a half years ago to ameliorate this constant worry. A few days ago, the number of beneficiaries of ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme crossed over one crore. More than one crore patients implies that more than one crore families of our country have been served.  Do you know what more than one crore patients means? It maens the cumulative population of two Norways and two Singapores have been provided free treatment in such a short time.
If the poor had to pay for the treatment post hospitalization, had they not received free treatment, according to a rough estimate, more than rupees 14 thousand crores would have been required to be paid out of their own pockets. The ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme has saved spending this huge amount of money belonging to the poor.  I congratulate not only the beneficiaries of ‘Ayushman Bharat’ but also all the doctors, nurses and medical staff who treated patients under this scheme. An important feature with the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme is its portability facility. This portability of the scheme has also helped to paint the country in the color of unity, which means, an underprivileged person from Bihar will get the same medical facility in Karnataka, which he would have got in his home state. Similarly, if a deprived person from Maharashtra is in need of medical treatment then he would get the same treatment facility in Tamil Nadu. Due to this scheme, the underprivileged in any area where the system of health is weak are able to seek the best medical treatment in any corner of the country.
Friends,
you will be surprised to know that 80 percent of the one crore beneficiaries hail from the rural areas of the nation. About 50 percent of these beneficiaries are our mothers and sisters and daughters. And most of these beneficiaries were suffering from diseases which could not be treated with standard medicines. Of these, 70 percent people have had surgical intervention. You can guess how these people have got rid of their trouble.
Kelansang, a six-year-old child in Chura-Chandpur, Manipur, has also got a new lease of life from the Ayushman scheme. Kelansang suffered from severe brain disease at such a tender age. Kelansang’s father, a daily wage laborer, and the mother working as a weaver faced a situation where it was becoming very difficult to seek treatment for their child. But due to the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme now, their son received free treatment. Amurtha Valli of Puducherry had a similar experience. For her also, ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme appeared as a saviour! Amurtha Valli’s husband had tragically died of a heart attack. Her 27-year-old son Jeeva also had heart disease and Doctors had suggested surgery for Jeeva, but, for Jeeva, a daily wage laborer, it was near impossible to get such a large operation done on his own earnings. However, Amurtha Valli registered her son in the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme, and  nine days later son Jeeva had heart surgery performed on him.
Friends,
I have only narrated a meagre three to four incidents but then there are more than one crore stories linked with ‘Ayushman Bharat’. These stories are of live people and of our own families who have been salvaged from suffering. I request you, whenever you get time, you must definitely converse with a person who has benefitted from his treatment under the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme. You will see that when an underprivileged steps out of the circle of the disease, you can witness in him a new vigour to combat poverty. And I want to tell the honest Tax payer of our country that the credit for happiness and satisfaction derived by the beneficiaries treated free under the ‘Ayushman Bharat’scheme makes you the rightful stakeholder of the benefic deed, our honest tax payer also deserves the
Punya,
the fruit of this altruistic deed.
My dear countrymen,
on one hand we are busy combating the Corona pandemic whereas on the other hand, we were recently confronted with natural calamity in certain parts of Eastern India. During the last few weeks, we have seen the havoc wreaked by Super Cyclone Amfan in West Bengal and Odisha. Many houses were razed by the storm. Farmers also suffered heavy losses. I went to take stock of the situation last week to Odisha and West Bengal. The courage and bravery with which the people of West Bengal and Odisha have faced the ordeal is commendable. In this hour of crisis, the country also stands in unison with the people of these two states in every manner whatsoever!
Friends,
on the one side where Eastern India is facing cyclonic calamity; on the other many parts of the country have been affected by locust attacks. These attacks again remind us of the great damage this small creature can inflict! The locust attack lasts for several days and affects a large area. Be it at the level of the Government of India, State Government, Agriculture Department or Administration, all are involved using modern techniques to not only help the farmers but also lessen the loss accruing due to this crisis. And attention is being paid to new inventions, and I am sure that together not only will we be able to battle out this crisis that is looming on our agricultural sector, but also manage to salvage our crops.
My dear countrymen,
a few days later, on 5
th
June, the entire world will celebrate ‘World Environment Day’. The theme for this year’s ‘World Environment Day’ is Bio Diversity. This theme is especially pertinent in the current circumstances. During Lockdown in the last few weeks the pace of life may have slowed down a bit but it has also given us an opportunity to introspect upon the rich diversity of nature or biodiversity around us. Much of the avian fauna had sort of disappeared due to sound and air pollution, and now after years people can once again listen to their melodic chirping in their homes.
There are also reports from many places of uninhibited behavioural patterns of animals. You must have read and seen these clips in social media just like I have. Many people are commenting, writing and sharing pictures that they are now able to see the hills far away from their homes, are able to see the sparkle of distant lights. By gazing at these pictures, a pledge must have arisen in the hearts of many of us – can we preserve scenes like these forever? These images have also inspired people to do something for nature. For ensuring that the rivers remain clean, animals and birds have the right to live freely and the sky remains pollution free, we must derive inspiration to live life in harmony with nature.
My dear countrymen,
we repeatedly hear the refrain that ‘Water is life! If there is water there is a tomorrow’, but we have a responsibility towards water as well. We have to save Rain water. Every drop has to be saved! How do we save rainwater in each and every village? The traditional conservation methods are in the form of very simple remedies, and employing these we can tap the water. If the water is retained for five days or a week, not only will it quench the thirst of mother earth, it will seep into the ground, and the same percolated water will become endowed with the power of life and therefore, in this rainy season, all of us should strive to save water, conserve water.
My dear countrymen,
a clean environment is directly an integral part of our lives, and of our children’s future too. Therefore, we have to ponder over this issue on individual level as well. I request you to serve nature on this ‘Environment Day’ by planting some trees and making some resolutions so that we can forge a daily relationship with nature. Yes! Summer is on the rise, so do not forget to facilitate water for the birds.
Friends,
all of us also have to bear in mind that after such austere penance, and after so many hardships, the country’s deft handling of the situation should not go in vain. We must not let this fight weaken. Becoming careless or lackadaisical can not be an option. The fight against Corona is still equally serious!
You, your family, may still face grave danger from Corona. We have to save the life of every human being, therefore, distancing of two yards, face masks and washing of hands are all those precautions that are to be meticulously followed in the same manner as we have been observing them so far. I am sure that you will take these precautions for yourself, your loved ones and for your country. With this assurance, my best wishes for your good health. We will meet in another episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ next month with many new topics.
during the present Corona pandemic, Yoga becomes all the more important, because this virus affects our respiratory system maximally. In yoga, there are many types of Pranayama that strengthen the respiratory system; the beneficial effects of which we have been witnessing for long. These are time tested techniques, which have their own distinct significance. Most people will be familiar with ‘Kapalbhati’ and ‘Anulom-Vilom Pranayam’. But there are many other forms of Pranayamas like ‘Bhastrika’, ‘Sheetali’, ‘Bhramari’ etc, which also have many benefits. By the way, the Ministry of AYUSH has also done a unique experiment this time to increase the practice of yoga in your life. The Ministry of AYUSH has started its International Video Blog competition entitled ‘My Life, My Yoga’.
Not only Indians, but people from all over the world can participate in this competition. To participate in this International Video Blog competition, you will have to make a three-minute video and upload it. In this video, you have to show performing Yoga, or Asana, that you usually do and also tell about the changes that have taken place in your life through yoga. I request all of you too participate in this competition, and through this novel way, be a part of the International Yoga Day also.
Friends,
in our country, for decades, crores of impoverished citizens have been living their lives engulfed by the constant concern- what will happen if they fall ill….to seek medical treatment or worry about earning bread for the family? Realizing this distress, the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme was launched about one and a half years ago to ameliorate this constant worry. A few days ago, the number of beneficiaries of ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme crossed over one crore. More than one crore patients implies that more than one crore families of our country have been served. Do you know what more than one crore patients means? It maens the cumulative population of two Norways and two Singapores have been provided free treatment in such a short time.
If the poor had to pay for the treatment post hospitalization, had they not received free treatment, according to a rough estimate, more than rupees 14 thousand crores would have been required to be paid out of their own pockets. The ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme has saved spending this huge amount of money belonging to the poor. I congratulate not only the beneficiaries of ‘Ayushman Bharat’ but also all the doctors, nurses and medical staff who treated patients under this scheme. An important feature with the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme is its portability facility. This portability of the scheme has also helped to paint the country in the color of unity, which means, an underprivileged person from Bihar will get the same medical facility in Karnataka, which he would have got in his home state. Similarly, if a deprived person from Maharashtra is in need of medical treatment then he would get the same treatment facility in Tamil Nadu. Due to this scheme, the underprivileged in any area where the system of health is weak are able to seek the best medical treatment in any corner of the country.
Friends,
you will be surprised to know that 80 percent of the one crore beneficiaries hail from the rural areas of the nation. About 50 percent of these beneficiaries are our mothers and sisters and daughters. And most of these beneficiaries were suffering from diseases which could not be treated with standard medicines. Of these, 70 percent people have had surgical intervention. You can guess how these people have got rid of their trouble.
Kelansang, a six-year-old child in Chura-Chandpur, Manipur, has also got a new lease of life from the Ayushman scheme. Kelansang suffered from severe brain disease at such a tender age. Kelansang’s father, a daily wage laborer, and the mother working as a weaver faced a situation where it was becoming very difficult to seek treatment for their child. But due to the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme now, their son received free treatment. Amurtha Valli of Puducherry had a similar experience. For her also, ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme appeared as a saviour! Amurtha Valli’s husband had tragically died of a heart attack. Her 27-year-old son Jeeva also had heart disease and Doctors had suggested surgery for Jeeva, but, for Jeeva, a daily wage laborer, it was near impossible to get such a large operation done on his own earnings. However, Amurtha Valli registered her son in the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme, and nine days later son Jeeva had heart surgery performed on him.
Friends,
I have only narrated a meagre three to four incidents but then there are more than one crore stories linked with ‘Ayushman Bharat’. These stories are of live people and of our own families who have been salvaged from suffering. I request you, whenever you get time, you must definitely converse with a person who has benefitted from his treatment under the ‘Ayushman Bharat’ scheme. You will see that when an underprivileged steps out of the circle of the disease, you can witness in him a new vigour to combat poverty. And I want to tell the honest Tax payer of our country that the credit for happiness and satisfaction derived by the beneficiaries treated free under the ‘Ayushman Bharat’scheme makes you the rightful stakeholder of the benefic deed, our honest tax payer also deserves the Punya, the fruit of this altruistic deed.
My dear countrymen,
on one hand we are busy combating the Corona pandemic whereas on the other hand, we were recently confronted with natural calamity in certain parts of Eastern India. During the last few weeks, we have seen the havoc wreaked by Super Cyclone Amfan in West Bengal and Odisha. Many houses were razed by the storm. Farmers also suffered heavy losses. I went to take stock of the situation last week to Odisha and West Bengal. The courage and bravery with which the people of West Bengal and Odisha have faced the ordeal is commendable. In this hour of crisis, the country also stands in unison with the people of these two states in every manner whatsoever!
Friends,
on the one side where Eastern India is facing cyclonic calamity; on the other many parts of the country have been affected by locust attacks. These attacks again remind us of the great damage this small creature can inflict! The locust attack lasts for several days and affects a large area. Be it at the level of the Government of India, State Government, Agriculture Department or Administration, all are involved using modern techniques to not only help the farmers but also lessen the loss accruing due to this crisis. And attention is being paid to new inventions, and I am sure that together not only will we be able to battle out this crisis that is looming on our agricultural sector, but also manage to salvage our crops.
My dear countrymen,
a few days later, on 5th June, the entire world will celebrate ‘World Environment Day’. The theme for this year’s ‘World Environment Day’ is Bio Diversity. This theme is especially pertinent in the current circumstances. During Lockdown in the last few weeks the pace of life may have slowed down a bit but it has also given us an opportunity to introspect upon the rich diversity of nature or biodiversity around us. Much of the avian fauna had sort of disappeared due to sound and air pollution, and now after years people can once again listen to their melodic chirping in their homes.
There are also reports from many places of uninhibited behavioural patterns of animals. You must have read and seen these clips in social media just like I have. Many people are commenting, writing and sharing pictures that they are now able to see the hills far away from their homes, are able to see the sparkle of distant lights. By gazing at these pictures, a pledge must have arisen in the hearts of many of us – can we preserve scenes like these forever? These images have also inspired people to do something for nature. For ensuring that the rivers remain clean, animals and birds have the right to live freely and the sky remains pollution free, we must derive inspiration to live life in harmony with nature.
My dear countrymen,
we repeatedly hear the refrain that ‘Water is life! If there is water there is a tomorrow’, but we have a responsibility towards water as well. We have to save Rain water. Every drop has to be saved! How do we save rainwater in each and every village? The traditional conservation methods are in the form of very simple remedies, and employing these we can tap the water. If the water is retained for five days or a week, not only will it quench the thirst of mother earth, it will seep into the ground, and the same percolated water will become endowed with the power of life and therefore, in this rainy season, all of us should strive to save water, conserve water.
My dear countrymen,
a clean environment is directly an integral part of our lives, and of our children’s future too. Therefore, we have to ponder over this issue on individual level as well. I request you to serve nature on this ‘Environment Day’ by planting some trees and making some resolutions so that we can forge a daily relationship with nature. Yes! Summer is on the rise, so do not forget to facilitate water for the birds.
Friends,
all of us also have to bear in mind that after such austere penance, and after so many hardships, the country’s deft handling of the situation should not go in vain. We must not let this fight weaken. Becoming careless or lackadaisical can not be an option. The fight against Corona is still equally serious!
You, your family, may still face grave danger from Corona. We have to save the life of every human being, therefore, distancing of two yards, face masks and washing of hands are all those precautions that are to be meticulously followed in the same manner as we have been observing them so far. I am sure that you will take these precautions for yourself, your loved ones and for your country. With this assurance, my best wishes for your good health. We will meet in another episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ next month with many new topics.
Thank you
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
Mann Ki Baat has now attained the halfway mark in its journey for the year 2020. During this period, we touched upon a multitude of subjects. Naturally, much of our conversation revolved around the global pandemic; the calamity that confronted the human race but, I have been noticing these days, an endless topic of discussion among people is, “when will this year go by!” Phone conversations tend to begin with the lament, “why is this year moving on so sluggishly?” People are writing, conversing with friends on how the year is not good. Some of them are expressing that 2020 is not auspicious. People just want the year to be over, one way or the other.
Friends,
there are times when I feel why it isso! It is possible that there are reasons behind such remarks. Just 6-7 months ago, little did we know about the catastrophe that Corona is, nor had one expected the fight to go on this long! As if one calamity weren’t enough, the country has had to face an unending slew of challenges, day after day. A few days ago, our east coast had to face the fury of cyclone Amphan; on the West coast it was cyclone Nisarg. In many a state, our farmer brothers and sisters had to bear the brunt of swarming locusts…. if nothing else, many parts of the country have been witnessing intermittent earthquakes. Amidst all these, the country has had to deal with the designs of some of our neighbours. As a matter of fact, rare are the occasions when one gets to hear of adversities of this kind that too simultaneously. We have come to a stage where people are linking even minor incidents to these challenges. Friends, adversities do descend upon us; calamities do confront us…. but the question is – should they lead us into the belief that the year 2020 is not good? Is it rational to presume on the basis of the first half that the entire year would be so? Not at all, my dear countrymen, absolutely not. In a given year, challenges could vary between one and say, fifty; the number does not determine the goodness of that year. Historically, India has always emerged brighter and stronger, ensuring victory over all kinds of disasters and challenges. For centuries, myriad tyrants invaded India pushing her to the edge of such an abyss of adversities that people once used to feel that the very idea, the fabric of Bharat would be wiped out: her culture would be annihilated. But India overcame the scourge, and more gloriously so.
Friends,
we are familiar with our adage- ‘Creation is permanent…. creation is continuous.’  I am reminded of a few lines of a song.
YEH KALKAL CHALCHAL BEHTI, KYA KEHTA GANGA DHARA?
YUG YUG SE BEHTA AATA, YEH PUNYA PARWAAH  HAMARA.
Gurgling and burbling, what do the ripples of the Ganga say?
For eons and eons, unstoppable has been our mighty divine flow.
The song further says,
KYA USKO ROK SAKENGE, MITNE WALE MIT JAYIEN,
KANKAD-PATHAR KI HASTI, KYA BADHA BANKAR AAYE.
Who has the might to stem the steady flow….
many sank without a trace!
Can pebbles and stones,
Ever be an impediment to the divine grace?
India too, on the one hand, witnessed a series of colossal adversities; on the other, numerous forms of creations kept evolving, overcoming hurdles. Literature saw resurgence, new researches emerged, new concepts were propounded. This means, even in the worst of times, the process of creation went on undeterred in every field, enriching our culture, leading to our country’s progress. India has always transformed adversities into stepping stones to success. With the same sentiment, we have to move on, march on, in today’s troubled times. If you advance, in step with 130 crore countrymen, this year will prove to be a record setter, path breaker on new fronts for the country. This very year the country will attain newer goals, reaching newer heights with all new wings. I firmly believe in the collective might of 130 crore countrymen…..all of you…I have firm belief in the glorious heritage of the country.
My dear countrymen,
irrespective of the magnitude of the calamity confronting us, India’s
sanskar
…way of life inspires one and all to serve selflessly. The way India extended a helping hand to the world during difficult times, it has reinforced India’s role in ushering in peace and development. This period also saw the world realising India’s spirit of universal brotherhood…at the same time it also noticed India’s commitment and might when it comes to safeguarding her sovereignty and territorial integrity. Those who cast an evil eye on Indian soil in Ladakh have got a befitting response. India honours the spirit of friendship…she is also capable of giving an appropriate response to any adversary, without shying away. Our brave soldiers have proven that they will not let anyone cast an evil eye on the glory and honour of Mother India.
Friends,
the entire country comes together in paying tributes to the bravery of our
jawans
who attained martyrdom in Ladakh. The entire country bows to them in reverence, with gratitude. Just like their family members, every Indian painfully regrets the loss. The inner sense of pride that families feel on the supreme sacrifice of their brave sons…their sentiment for the country, constitutes the true power, the might of the country. You might have seen parents of martyrs referring to sending other sons, other young family members too, to join the army. The words of the father of Shaheed Kundan Kumar of Bihar, keep echoing. He had mentioned sending even his grandsons to the army to defend the country. This spirit permeates across all martyr families. Truly, the sense of sacrifice displayed by these family members is worthy of veneration. The resolve with which our jawans made the supreme sacrifice for the security of Mother India, should be the aim of our lives….and this applies to each and every one of us. Our pursuits and endeavours should be in the same direction…we should strive towards enhancing the country’s capabilities and capacities in safeguarding our borders. A self-reliant India would be a tribute to our martyrs in the truest, deepest sense. Rajni ji has written to me from Assam. She says, after watching what happened in eastern Ladakh, she has taken a vow…and the vow is that she will buy only ‘local’….and for the sake of ‘local’, she will also be vocal. I am receiving messages on these lines from every corner of the country. Many have expressed through their letters that they have adopted this very path. Similarly, Mohan Ramamurthy from Madurai, writes that he wishes India to be self-reliant in the defence sector.
Friends,
before independence, in the realm of the defence sector, our country was ahead of many countries in the world. There used to be a multitude of ordnance factories. Many countries that lagged behind us then, are ahead of us now. After independence, we should have made efforts in the defence sector, taking advantage of our prior experience…. we did not. But today, in the fields of defence and technology, India is relentlessly endeavouring to advance on those fronts…. India is taking strides towards self-reliance.
Friends,
no mission can be successfully achieved without people’s participation. And that is why, on the path towards a self-reliant India, as a citizen, our collective resolve, commitment and support is necessary; rather imperative. When you buy ‘local’, become vocal for local you play a role in strengthening the country. This, too, in its own way, is service to one’s country. Whatever be your profession; wherever, there is ample scope in the realm of service to the country. Keeping in mind the requirement of the country, whatever you do, comes under this very spirit of service. And this very spirit on your part lends strength to the country, one way or the other. We should also remember that the stronger our country is, the possibilities of peace in the world will proportionately be bolstered.
It is said,
VIDYA VIVADAYA DHANAM  MADAAY, SHAKTIH  PARESHAAN PARIPEEDNAYAKHALASYA SADHOH  VIPAREETAM  ETAT, GYAANAYDAANAYCH RAKSHANAY.
Which means, a person who is wicked by nature, uses education to foster conflict, wealth for conceit and strength to trouble others. Whereas, a gentleman uses education for knowledge, wealth for helping and strength for protecting. India has always used her might, echoing the same sentiment. India’s solemn resolve is to safeguard her honour and sovereignty. India’s aim is – a self-reliant India. India’s tradition is -trust and friendship. India’s spirit is brotherhood. We shall keep moving ahead abiding by these principles.
My dear countrymen,
in these times of the corona crisis, the country has moved out of the lockdown phase to the unlock phase. During this unlock period, one will have to focus deeply on two points- defeating corona and strengthening the economy and bolstering it. Friends, during the unlock period, we have to stay more vigilant compared to the lockdown period. Only your alertness can save you from corona. Always, remember, if you do not wear a mask, do not observe the two-yard social distancing norms or do not take other precautions, you are putting others at risk besides yourselves, especially the elderly and children at home. Hence, I urge all countrymen…and I repeatedly do so…do not be negligent…take care of yourselves and others too.
Friends,
during this unlock phase, many other things are getting unlocked, which had hitherto, shackled the country for decades. For years our mining sector was in a state of lockdown. The decision to allow commercial auction has altered the scenario completely.  Just a few days ago, historic reforms in the space sector were brought in. Through these reforms, the sector which was in a state of lockdown for years was set free. This will not only pace up the movement towards self-reliant India, it will also boost up the advancement of technology in India. If you glance at our agricultural sector, you will notice that many aspects of this sector too were in a state of lockdown for decades. This sector toohas now been unlocked. This, on the one hand grants freedom to farmers to sell their produce to anyone they wish to, anywhere; on the other hand, this has paved the way for enhanced loans. There are many such sectors in which, amidst, all crises, our country is opening up new avenues of development through historic decisions.
My dear countrymen,
every month, we come across stories in the News that touch our hearts. They remind us how every Indian is earnestly ready to help one another, to the best extent possible, according to one’s capacity.
I got an opportunity to read one such inspiring story from Arunachal Pradesh on the media. Mirem village of Siang district attempted a unique feat, that has become an inspiration for India. Most residents of this village stay elsewhere working for their livelihood. During the Corona pandemic, they were returning to the village. The villagers, on noticing that, decided to make arrangements for their quarantine, outside the village, in advance. They came together and erected 14 temporary huts at a short distance from the village, deciding that when those people would reach the village, they would first be quarantined for a few days in these huts. The huts were equipped with toilets, water, and electricity, including essential items for daily needs. It is not surprising that this awareness and collective effort on the part of village folk of Mirem attracted widespread attention and accolades.
Friends,
it is said in our scriptures –
Swabhavam: naJahatieva,  sadhuh:  aapadratopi san l
Karpoor: Pawak saprishta: Saurabham labhteetrama ||
Which means, just like camphor does not abandon its fragrance even while burning in fire, the virtuous do not forsake their qualities or their true nature while facing a disaster. Today, the labour force of our country, our worker brethren are an embodiment of this mantra. You can witness for yourself – these days there are so many stories of our migrant workers who have become a source of inspiriation for the entire country. In U.P. the migrant workers who returned to the village of Barabanki took an initiative to return the Kalyani River to its pristine, natural form. Upon witnessing this resolve to salvage the river, the farmers and other people from nearby areas also got enthused. After returning to their respective villages, whilst spending their mandatory time in isolation or quarantine centres, the manner in which our worker brethren have employed their skills to transform the conditions around them is amazing! But, friends, there are many such stories from lakhs of villages in our country, which still have not reached us.
As is the nature of our country, I firmly believe, friends that many such incidents must have occurred in your village or in your vicinity. If such anincident has come to your attention, you must write an account of such an inspiring event to me. In this time of calamity, these positive events, these stirring stories will inspire the others.
My dear countrymen,
the corona virus has definitely changed the way we live. I was reading a very interesting article in the Financial Times published from London. It was written that, during the Corona pandemic, the demand for spices including ginger, turmeric and other spices has increased not only in Asia but also in America. The entire world is focused on increasing theirimmunity at this time, and these immunity enhancing ingredients are linked with our country. We should be able to communicate about their speciality in such easy and simple language to the people of the world, that they can understand it easily and we can make our own contribution towardsmaking a healthier planet.
My dear countrymen,
if there would not have been a crisis like the Corona pandemic we mightn’t have pondered questions like-, What is life? Why there is life?  How is our life? These are points we may have not thought of!  This is the very reason why many people have been living under mental stress. And, on the other hand, people also shared with me how, during lockdown, they have re-discovered the small facets of happiness in our lives. Many people have sent me their experiences of playing traditional in-door games and revelling with the entire family.
Friends,
our country has a very rich heritage of traditional sports. For example, you may have heard the name of a game called“Pachisi”. This game is played as “Pallanguli” in Tamil Nadu, is called “Ali Guli Mane” in Karnataka and is known as “VamanGuntlu” in Andhra Pradesh. It is a type of game employing strategy in which a board is usedwith many pits, in which the players have to catch hold of the pellet or seed. It is said that this game has spread from South India to Southeast Asia and then to the rest of theworld.
Friends,
today every child knows about the game of snakes and ladders. But, do you know that this is also another traditional Indian game, called “Moksha Patam” or “Parampadam”. We also have another traditional game in our country called “Gutta.” This game is popular with elders and the children alike and involves simply getting hold of five small stones of the same size and Behold! –  you are ready to play Gutta!You’ve to throw one stone into the air and while that stone is in the air, you have to grab the remaining stones on the ground. Usually there isn’t a need of any major contraptions in the indoor games prevalent in our country. Someone just brings along a chalk or a stone, draws a few lines with it on the ground and a game is ready to be played! In games requiring a dice, improvisation is made with cowrie shells or tamarind seeds.
Friends,
I do know that today while I’m narrating about these games many must have returned to their childhood! Many of you must have got nostalgic about your childhood days. I reiterate – why have you forgotten those days? Why have you forgotten those games? My request to the grandparents and the elders of the house, if you do not handover these gamesto the new generation, then who shall do it?Now that it has come to studying online, in order to strike a balance and also to get rid of online gaming we must do so for the sake of our children. Herein also lies a novel and a strong opportunity for our start-ups and even for our younger generation.
Let us present the traditional Indoor Games of India in a new and attractive avatar. Those mobilizing theresources pertaining to these games, the suppliers and start-ups associated with these traditional indoor games will become very popular, and, we have to remember that, our Indian sports are also local, and we have already pledged to be vocal for local.  And, my little friends, to the children of every household, and my young friends, today, I am making a special request. Children, will you accept my request? See, I appeal thatyou must do one thing that I am saying – whenever you have a little time on your hands, ask your parents to use the mobile and record the interview of your Dada-Dadi, Nana-Nani or whosoever elder in the house!  You would have seen journalists conductinginterviews on TV, you also do a similar kind of interview and record it on the mobile!Andwhat will be the questions you would be asking them? Let me give you some suggestions.
You must ask them about their lifestyle as children, what sports they played, sometimes if they went to the theatre?Orwent to the cinema? Sometimes if they had gone to their maternal uncle’s house during holidays?Or visit a field or a barn? How they celebrated the festivals? There are many a topics upon which you can ask questions.They too will like reminiscing about life 40 to 50 years or say 60 years ago and it will give them a lot of joy!And for you too it would be great fun to learn about India 40-50 years ago, how the area was where you presently live? How were the nearby precincts and what the ways and customs of the people then were?You will get to learn and know about these things quite easily. You will find for yourself that it will be fun and it can become a good video album, a very invaluable treasure for the family!
Friends,
it is true that an autobiography or biography is a very useful tool to get closer to the veracity of history. You too while chattingwith your elders will be able to understand about their times, their childhood and the facets of their youth. This is an excellent opportunity that the elders will get to narrate about their childhood and about their period to the children of their home.
Friends,
Monsoon has now reached large parts of the countryand meteorologists are very enthusiastic about the rains and are full of hope. If the rainsare bountiful, our farmers will reap a bumper harvest and the environment will also be green. In the rainy season, nature also rejuvenates itself. As human beings exploit natural resources, nature in a way, during rains, replenishes and restocks them. But, this refilling is possible only if we support our mother earth and carry out our responsibilities. A little effort by us helps nature and environment quite significantly. Many of our countrymen are putting extraordinary efforts in thisendeavour.
In Mandavali, Karnataka there is an 80-85 year old elder Kamegowda. Kamegowdaji is an ordinary farmer, albeit possessing an extraordinary personality. He has achieved a personal feat that will leave anyone awestruck! Kamegowdaji, aged 80-85 takes out his animals for grazing but at the same time he has taken it upon himself to build new ponds in his area. He wants to overcome the problem of water scarcity in his area; therefore, in the work of water conservation, he is engaged in the work of constructing small ponds. You will be surprised that an octagenerarian likeKamegowdaji, till now, has dug 16 ponds, through his hard work and the sweat of his brow. It is possible that the ponds he has constructed may not be very big but then his efforts are huge. Today, the entire area has got a new lease of life on account of these ponds
Friends,
Vadodara in Gujarat is also an inspirational example. Here, the district administration and the local residents together organized an interesting campaign. Due to this campaign, today rain water harvesting has been initiated in one thousand schools of Vadodara. Consequently, it is estimated that, on an average about 100 million litres of water is being conserved annually.
Friends,
during this rainy season we should also take the initiative to think and do something similar to protect nature and to protect the environment. Just like at many places, preparations would have begun for Ganesh Chaturthi. Can we try this time to make eco-friendly Ganesh statues and worship only them? Can we forego the worship of such idols, which, after being immersed in rivers or ponds, become a hazard for the water and the living organisms in it? I firmly believe that you will respond to my call. Amidst this, we should be on guard from various ailments that surface with Monsoon. During the corona pandemic, we have to protect ourselves from these diseases also. Keep using Ayurvedic medicines, herbal decoction and hot water to stay healthy.
My dear countrymen,
today on the
28
th
of June, India is paying homage to one of her former Prime Ministers, who led the country through a critical phase. This day marks the commencement of the birth centenary year of our former Prime Minister Shri PV Narasimha Rao ji. When we talk about ShriPV Narasimha Rao ji, naturally, his image that emerges before us is that of a political leader, but it is also true that he was a polyglot!He used to speak many Indian and foreign languages. He was rooted in Indian values; and had knowledge of western literature and science as well.
He was one of the most experienced leaders of India. But, there is another aspect of his life which is remarkable that we should know. Friends, Narasimha Rao ji had joined the freedom movement in his teens and when the Nizam of Hyderabad refused permission to sing VandeMataram, he took an active part in the movement against the Nizam and at that time, he was only
17
years old. From a young age, Shriman Narasimha Rao was ever onward in raising his voice against injustice. He left no stone unturned to raise his voice. Narasimha Rao ji also understood history very well. His rise from a very simple background, his emphasis on education, his eagerness to learn, and, along with all these qualities, his leadership ability are all memorable. I urge you – in the birth centenary year of Narasimha Rao ji, let all of us, try to know as much as possible about his life and thoughts. I once again pay my tributes to him.
My dear countrymen,
in this ‘ Mann Ki Baat’, many topics were discussed. Next timewe meet, some more new topics will be touched upon. You must keep on sending your messages and innovative ideas to me. We shall all move forward together, and the days to come will be even more positive, as I said in the beginning, we will not only do better in this year i.e.
2020
, but we will move forward and the country will touch new heights. I am confident that
2020
will give a new direction to India in this decade. With this belief, you too should march forward, stay healthy and stay positive. With these good wishes, I thank you very much.
Namaskar
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today, is the 26
th
of July, a very special day…It is Kargil Vijay Diwas. It was on this very day 21 years ago, our Army unfurled the flag of victory in the battle of Kargil. Friends, India can never forget the circumstances under which the battle of Kargil took place. Pakistan had embarked upon this misadventure, nursing delusions of encroaching upon Indian soil, to distract attention from the internal strife prevailing there. India was then in the process of making efforts to foster good relations with Pakistan. But as it is said,
“बयरु अकारन सब काहू सों।
जो कर हित अनहित ताहू सों।।”
Which means, to the wicked, enmity with one and all for no reason comes naturally. People with such a disposition keep thinking of harming even their well-wishers… that is why when India extended a hand of friendship, Pakistan tried to respond, stabbing in the back. But after that, when our gallant Army displayed deeds of valour, when India demonstrated her might the whole world watched it. You can imagine….the enemy lodged in soaring mountainous heights and our armed forces, our brave soldiers fighting from down below! But it was not about victoriously conquering the heights…
It was the victory of high morale and bravery of our armed forces in the truest sense of the term. Friends, at that point of time, I too was blessed with the opportunity to go to Kargil and witness the gallantry of our Jawans. That day is one of the most precious  moments of my life. I am noticing, today, people are reminiscing the Kargil Victory, throughout the country. On social media, they are saluting their brave heart heroes and paying tributes to those martyred with the
#Courage in Kargil
. Today, I, on behalf of all countrymen salute the brave soldiers….and along with them I also salute the brave mothers who gave rise to the real heroes, sons of Mother India. I urge the youth of the country to share stories of the heroic deeds of our brave hearts and sacrifices on part of the brave mothers, throughout the day. Friends, today I call upon you to visit, the website
www.gallantryawards.gov.in
positively. There, you will come across an array of information on our brave warriors and tales of their valour. And when you discuss these with your friends, they will become a source of inspiration. You must certainly visit this website… infact, I would like to insist on multiple visits. Friends, what Atal ji had said from Red Fort during the Kargil war is relevant to all of us even today. Atal ji, had then reminded the nation of a mantra of Gandhi ji. Mahatma Gandhi’s mantra was…in the face of any dilemma, in order to decide what to do or what not to do, one must think of the poorest and the most helpless person of India. One must assess whether one’s deed will result in benefitting that particular person or not. Going beyond Gandhi Ji’s thought, Atal ji had said that the Kargil war has given us another Mantra- And the Mantra was – before taking any important decision, we should think whether our step, our endeavor is befitting to the honour of the soldier who laid down his life in those remote mountains. Come, let us listen to the sentiment in the very voice of Atal ji- Let us understand it…the time too has come to accept it.
Sound byte
“
All of us remember that Gandhi ji had given us a Mantra. He had said that in the face of any dilemma in order to decide what to do, you should think of the poorest and the most helpless person of India; ask yourself whether your deed will result in benefiting that particular person. Kargil has given us another Mantra- And the Mantra was – before taking any important decision, we should think whether our step, our endeavor is befitting to the honour of the soldier who laid down his life in those remote mountains.
”
Friends in times of war, whatever we say or do has immense bearing on the morale of the soldier, ever vigilant at the border, as well as the morale of his family. We should never forget this… and that is why our conduct, our demeanour, our speech, our statements, our limits, our aims… whatever we do and say, must distinctly be conducive to enhancing the morale & honour of our soldiers. Countrymen bound by a thread of unity, with the Mantra that the Nation is above everything else bolster the strength of our soldiers much more than thousand fold. We are aware of the dictum
‘Sanghe Shakti, Kalau Yuge’; the essence of which tells us that there is strength in unity in the present era.
At times, without paying heed to the essence, we encourage certain things on Social Media that are detrimental to the country. There are times when we keep forwarding things out of sheer curiosity. Despite knowing that it is wrong, we keep doing it. These days, battles are fought not just on borders; they are fought within the country too, on many fronts simultaneously. And every countryman has to decide his or her role in that. We too should determine our roles, fully bearing in mind soldiers fighting on the borders under the harshest conditions.
My dear countrymen, over the last few months, the way the country fought against Corona unitedly, has proven many apprehensions wrong. Today, the recovery rate in our country is better compared to other countries; the mortality rate in the context of Corona in our country is much less as well, compared to most countries, of course, the loss of even one life is saddening, but India has also succeeded in saving the lives of millions of her people. But friends, the hazards of Corona are far from being over. At many places, it is spreading fast. We need to be extra vigilant. We have to bear in mind that Corona is as fatal today as it was in the beginning – that’s why we have to be fully cautions. Wearing a face mask, using a gamchcha or a light towel to cover, two yard distancing, frequently washing hands, avoiding spitting anywhere, taking full care of hygiene & sanitation- these are our weapons to protect us from Corona. There are times when masks cause inconvenience, one feels like removing them from the face- especially during a conversation. When a mask is required the most, we tend to remove it. At such times, I urge you that whenever you feel your mask is bothersome and you want to remove it, spare a thought for those doctors, those nurses; think of our Corona warriors. You will find them wearing masks for hours together, diligently working to save our lives- sometimes wearing masks for a span of eight to ten hours. Doesn’t that discomfort them? Just think about them… you too will feel that as citizens, we should not be negligent at all; nor let others be so. On the one hand, we have to fight the battle against Corona with full awareness & vigilance; on the other, whatever our responsibilities, through sheer perseverance… business, jobs or studies… we have to lend pace to it, taking it to greater heights. Friends, during the Corona times, our rural regions came up as a beacon of guidance for the entire country. Many examples of effective endeavours on part of local residents of villages & Gram Panchayats are coming to the fore. In Jammu there is a Gram Panchayat named Gram Treva. The sarpanch there is Balbir Kaur Ji. I am told that Balbir Kaur ji got a 30 bed Quarantine Centre constructed in her Panchayat. She also made arrangements for availability of water on roads leading to the Panchayat. She ensured that people did not have to face any problem in washing hands. Not just that Balbir Kaur ji, with a spray pump slung on her shoulder embarks upon sanitization of the entire Panchayat & its neighbourhood, along with volunteers. Similarly, there is a Kashmiri woman sarpanch- Zaitoona Begum ji of Chauntliwaar, Gaanderbal.
Zaitoona Begum ji decided that her Panchayat would fight the battle against Corona and along with that, create income opportunities too. She distributed free masks & free ration in the vicinity; at the same time she distributed crop seeds & apple saplings so that people were not subjected to inconvenience in farming & horticulture. Friends, there is another inspiring example from Kashmir. Shriman Mohd Iqbal is the Municipal President of Anantnag. He required a sprayer for sanitization of his area. He was informed that the machine would have to be brought from another town, that too at a cost of Six Lakh Rupees. On this, Shriman Iqbal ji, through his own efforts, designed & made a sprayer machine, and that too at a cost of Fifty Thousand Rupees. There are many similar examples. Such inspiring examples are emerging in the entire country, from all corners, everyday. All of these are worthy of accolades. Challenges did come; but people rose up to them with singular fortitude.
My dear countrymen, the correct approach, a positive approach always goes a long way in transforming distressing times into opportunities, adversities into triggers of development & progress. In the present times of Corona, we have witnessed how the youth & women of our country have come up with new experiments on the basis of their talent & skills. In Bihar, many women self help groups have begun making masks with Madhubani motifs… by and by, they turned out to be very popular. These Madhubani masks, in a way, propagate a regional tradition; besides protecting health, they also create opportunities for livelihood. You surely know of Bamboo which grows abundantly in the North East. Now, using the same Bamboo, artisans of Tripura, Manipur and Assam have started crafting high quality water bottles and Tiffin-boxes. If you glance at the craftsmanship of these bottles, you will not believe that Bamboo can be used to create such fine products. Moreover, these bottles are eco friendly. Before actually making them, the Bamboo is first boiled, adding Neem and other medicinal shrubs. Thus, these bottles also acquire medicinal value. An example from Jharkhand shows us how small local products can be hugely successful. In Bishunpur, Jharkhand, more than thirty groups are collectively cultivating lemongrass. It takes four months for lemongrass to mature and its oil fetches a decent price in the market. These days, this product is much in demand. I also wish to refer to two regions of the country- both are hundreds of kilometers apart; yet are contributing in making India self reliant in their own unique, novel ways. One is Ladakh; the other is Kutch. The mere mention of Leh-Ladakh creates images of picturesque valleys, mountain heights & whiffs of fresh air. On the other hand, reference to Kutch draws images of an unending desert with no vegetation in sight. In Ladakh, a distinct fruit called chooli or apricot also known as Khubani is grown. This produce has the capacity to transform the economy of the area. But unfortunately, vagaries of supply chains & weather are some of the formidable challenges it keeps facing. To reduce spoilage to the minimum, a new innovation has been adopted for use. This is a Dual system, called solar Apricot Dryer & space heater. This desiccates apricots, other fruits & vegetables as per requirement; that too in a hygienic manner. Earlier, when apricots used to be dried in the vicinity of farms, there would be spoilage, besides loss of quality of fruit on account of dust & rainwater. On the other side, these days, farmers of Kutch are making commendable efforts in the cultivation of Dragon fruit. Many people are perplexed when they hear Kutch & Dragon fruit together. But, today, many farmers there have taken to this activity. Many innovations are taking place for enhancing fruit quality, productivity & yield.
I have been told that the popularity of Dragon Fruits is constantly increasing, especially usage in breakfast has increased considerably. The farmers of Kutch have resolved that the country should not import Dragon Fruit and this is what self reliance is all about.
Friends, when we think of doing something new, think innovatively, then even such tasks become possible, which, in general, no one imagines, as exemplified by some youth of Bihar. Earlier they used to do routine jobs. One day, they decided to start cultivating pearls. In their area, people did not know much about this, but, this group of people, first, gathered all the requisite information, went to Jaipur and Bhubaneswar and took training and started cultivating pearls in their village. Today, they are not just earning a lot from this activity but have also started training the migrant labourers returning from other states at Muzaffarpur, Begusarai and Patna. And for many people, this has opened the avenues to self-reliance.
Friends, a few days from now, the auspicious festival of Rakshabandhan will be celebrated. These days, I am noticing that many people and institutions are campaigning to celebrate Rakshabandhan this time in a different manner. And many people are linking the festival with Vocal for Local, and this is true too. In society, if the business of a person near our home increases on account of our festivals and thus, in turn, his festival becomes merrier, then the joy of the festival increases manifold. Many felicitations to all the countrymen on Rakshabandhan.
Friends, the 7
th
of August is National Handloom Day. The Handloom of India and our Handicrafts encompass a glorious history of hundreds of years. It should be an endeavour on part of all of us to use Indian Handloom and Handicrafts as much as possible, and also communicate to more and more people about them. The more the world knows about the richness and diversity of Indian handloom and handicrafts, the greater our local artisans and weavers will benefit.
Friends, especially my young friends, our country is changing. How is she changing? How fast is she changing? In what all fields is she undergoing change? If we look at it with a positive point of view, we ourselves will be astounded! There was a time, when whether in sports or other sectors, most people were either from big cities or from famous families or from well-known schools or colleges. Now, the country is changing. Our youth are coming forward from villages, from small towns and from ordinary families. New heights of success are being scaled. These people are moving forward in the midst of crises, fostering new dreams. We see something similar to this in the results of the board exams that have recently been announced. Today in this episode of Mann Ki Baat we will talk to some such talented sons and daughters. Kritika Nandal is one such talented daughter and she is from Panipat in Haryana.
Modi ji – Hello, Kritika ji Namaste |
Kritika – Namaste Sir |
Modi ji – Many congratulations to you for such a good result.
Kritika – Thank you sir.
Modi ji – And You must be tired taking so many calls on the telephone these days! So many people must be calling you!
Kritika – Yes sir.
Modi ji – And those who congratulate you must themselves also be feeling proud that they know you. How do you feel?
Kritika – Sir it feels very nice. I myself feel so proud after making parents feel honoured
Modi ji – Ok tell me who is your biggest inspiration?
Kritika – Sir, my mummy is my biggest inspiration.
Modi ji –Wah! Okay, what are you learning from your mother?
Kritika – Sir, she has faced so many difficulties in her life and yet
she is so bold and so strong, sir. Seeing her, I get so
inspired that I feel I should also become like her.
Modi ji –How educated is your mom?
Kritika – Sir, she has done her BA.
Modi ji –Ok she has done her BA!
Kritika – Yes sir.
Modi ji – Fine. So, mother must also be teaching you.
Kritika – Yes sir. She teaches me; tells me everything about the ways
of the world
Modi ji –She must also be scolding you?
Kritika–Yes Sir, she scolds me also.
Modi ji –Ok beta, what do you want to do next?
Kritika – Sir, I want to become a doctor.
Modi ji –That’s great!
Kritika– MBBS
Modi ji – Look, becoming a doctor is not an easy task!
Kritika – Yes sir.
Modi ji – You will get the degree because you are brilliant, beta;
But….’ the life of a doctor…. That is very dedicated to the
society.
Kritika – Yes sir.
Modi ji –Some nights ….. the doctor cannot sleep in peace! Sometimes it’s a call from the patient, sometimes its a call from the hospital and then one has to rush. And that is, in a way, 24×7, Three Sixty Five Days! The life of a doctor is dedicated in service of the  people.
Kritika – Yes Sir.
Modi ji -And there is a risk too, because you never know  nowadays, the kind of diseases that are there, a big crisis looms even in front of the doctor.
Kritika–Yes Sir,
Modi ji – Right Kritika, Haryana has always been an inspiring, encouraging state in the arena of sports in entire India!
Kritika–Yes Sir.
Modi ji – So do you participate in any sport? Do you like some sports?
Kritika – Sir, I played basketball at school.
Modi ji – Ah, what is your height, are you tall?
Kritika – No sir, I’m five feet two.
Modi ji – Well then do you like the game?
Kritika – Sir, its just passion, I just play the game
Modi ji – Good, good! Ok Kritikaji, do convey Pranaam to your mother on my behalf, she has made you able like this and has made your life worthy. Greetings to your mother and congratulations and best wishes to you.
Kritika – Thank you sir.
Come! We now go to Kerala, Ernakulam to talk to a young
man there. the youth of Kerala.
Modi ji – Hello
Vinayak – Hello Sir. Namaskar.
Modi ji – So Vinayak, congratulations!
Vinayak– Yes. Thank you sir.
Modi ji – Well done Vinayak, well done!
Vinayak– Yes. Thank you sir,
Modi ji – How is the Josh?
Vinayak – High sir
Modi ji  – Do you play any sport?
Vinayak – Badminton.
Modi ji –   Badminton?
Vinayak – Yes.. Yes.
Modi ji – In school ? Or did you have any chance to take a training?
Vinayak –  No, in school we have already got some training
Modi ji –  Hmm
Vinayak –   From our teachers.
Modi ji – Hmm
Vinayak – So that we get opportunity to participate outside
Modi ji – Wow!
Vinayak – From the school itself!
Modi ji – How many states have you visited ?
Vinayak – I have visited only Kerala and Tamilnadu
Modi ji – Only Kerala and Tamilnadu?
Vinayak – Oh yes
Modi ji – So, would you like to visit Delhi ?
Vinayak – Yes Sir, now, I am applying in Delhi University for my
Higher Studies.
Modi ji – Wah, so you are coming to Delhi
Vinayak –  Yes sir.
Modi ji – Tell me, do you have any message for fellow students who will give Board Exams in future
Vinayak –  Hard work and proper time utilization
Modi ji – So perfect time management
Vinayak –  Yes sir
Modi ji – Vinayak, I would like to know your hobbies.
Vinayak –  ……… Badminton and then rowing.
Modi ji – So, you are active on social media
Vinayak –  Not, we are not allowed to use any electronic items or gadgets in the school
Modi ji – So you are lucky
Vinayak –  Yes Sir,
Modi ji – Well, Vinayak, congratulations again and wish you all the
best.
Vinayak –  Thank you sir.
Come! let us go to Uttar Pradesh. Let us speak to Shriman Usman Saifi of Amroha in Uttar Pradesh.
Modi ji-Hello Usman, Many many congratulations, lots of congratulations to you.
Usman- thank you sir.
Modi ji- Ok Usman, tell us whether you got the results that you wanted or the results were a little less.
Usman- No, got what I wanted. My parents are also very happy.
Modi ji-Wow, ok in the family other brothers…. are also as brilliant or is it only you who is so brilliant at home?
Usman- It is just me, my brother is a little naughty.
Modi ji- yes, yes
Usman- rest he is very happy with me.
Modi ji- Good, good. Ok Usman what was your favourite subject
when you were studying?
Usman – Mathematics
Modi ji- Wonderful! so what was the interest in mathematics? How
did it happen? Which teacher inspired you?
Usman- One of our subject teachers Rajat sir. He inspired me, taught me very well and my mathematics was good from the beginning….. and it is a very interesting subject too.
Modi hi – yes, yes
Usman- so the more you do, the more interested you get, so that is
why it is my favourite subject.
Modi ji- yes, yes. Do you know about online Vedic Mathematics
classes being run.
Usman- Yes sir
Modi ji- So, have you ever tried this?
Usman- No sir, not done yet
Modi ji- You try, many of your friends will feel as if you are a magician because you can calculate at the speed of a computer with Vedic mathematics. Very simple techniques and nowadays they are available online too.
Usman- Yes sir.
Modi ji- Since you are interested in Mathematics, you can contribute
many new things too.
Usman – Yes sir.
Modi ji- Ok Usman, what do you do in your spare time?
Usman- In my spare time sir, I keep writing one thing or the other. I
have a lot of interest in writing.
Modi ji- That’s great! Means you take interest in mathematics too and
literature as well.
Usman- yes sir.
Modi ji- What do you write? Write poems, write couplets?
Usman- Anything. I keep writing on any topic related to current
affairs.
Modi ji- Yes, yes
Usman- I keep getting new information like we had GST and our
demonetisation-all things.
Modi ji-That’s great! so what are you planning to do for college
education ahead.
Usman- College education? Sir, I have cleared my JEE Mains first attempt and now I will sit for second attempt in September. My main aim is that first I get a Bachelor Degree from IIT and after that go to Civil Services and become an IAS.
Modi ji- That’s great! Good, do you take interest in technology too?
Usman- Yes sir. That’s why I have opted for IT. For first time, best
IIT.
Modi ji- Ok then Usman, many best wishes from my side. You must be having a good time with your naughty brother, convey my pranam to your parents. They gave you an opportunity like this, encouraged you and I liked that you study current issues and write too on them along with your studies. See, the benefit of writing is that your thinking gets sharpened. There are many benefits of writing. So, many congratulations from my side
Usman- Thank you sir.
Come! Let us again go far south. Will speak to our daughter Kaniga from Tamilnadu, Namakkal and talk with Kaniga is very inspirational.
Modi ji- Kaniga ji, Vanakkam !
Kaniga- Vanakkam sir
Modi ji – How are you
Kaniga- Fine sir
Modi ji- First of all I would like to congratulate you for your
great success.
Kaniga- Thank you sir.
Modi ji- When I hear of Namakka I think of the Anjaneyar temple
Kaniga- Yes sir.
Modi ji -Now I will also remember my interaction with you.
Kaniga- Yes sir.
Modi ji- So, Congratulations again.
Kaniga- Thank you sir.
Modi ji- You would have worked very hard for exams, how was
your experience while preparing.
Kaniga- Sir, we are working hard from the start so, I didn’t expect this
result but I have written well so I got a good result.
Modi ji- What were your expectation?
Kaniga – 485 or486 like that, I thought so
Modi ji- And now
Kaniga- 490
Modi ji- So what is the reaction of your family members & your
teachers?
Kaniga- They were so happy and they were so proud sir.
Modi ji – Which one is your favourite subject.
Kaniga- Mathematics
Modi ji- Oh! And what are your future plans?
Kaniga – I’m going to become a Doctor if possible, in AFMC sir.
Modi ji- And your family members are also in a medical
profession or somewhere else?
Kaniga – No sir, my father is a driver but my sister is studying in
MBBS sir.
Modi ji- That’s great! so first of all I will do Pranaam to your father who is taking lot of care of your sister and yourself. It’s
great service he is doing.
Kaniga- Yes sir
Modi ji- And he is an inspiration for all.
Kaniga- Yes sir
Modi ji- So my congratulations to you, your sister and your father
and your family.
Kaniga- Thank you sir.
Friends, there are many other stories of such young friends whose courage and success in difficult conditions inspire us. I wanted to have as much as possible a chance to talk to young friends but time has its own limitations. I appeal to all young friends that they share with us their stories in their own voice that can inspire the country.
My dear countrymen, across the seven seas, thousands of miles away from India is a small country called “Suriname”. India has a very close relationship with ‘Suriname’. More than a hundred years ago, people from India went there, and made it their home. Today, the fourth or the fifth generation is there. Today in Suriname more than one fourth of the people are of Indian origin. Do you know? ‘Sarnami’ one of the common languages there is a dialect of Bhojpuri. We Indians feel very proud of these cultural relations.
Recently Shri Chandrika Parasad Santokhi has become the new president of Suriname. He is a friend of India and he had participated in the Person of Indian Origin (PIO) Parliamentary Conference organised in 2018. Shri Chandrika Prasad Santokhi ji started his oath with Veda hymns; he spoke in Sanskrit. He referred to vedas and concluded his oath with “Om Shanti: Shanti: Shanti:”. Holding the  veda in his hand he said- I, Chandrika Prasad Santokhi, and, further what did he say in his oath? He recited a hymn from Veda itself. He said-
ॐ
अग्ने
व्रतपते
व्रतं
चरिष्यामि
तच्छकेयम
तन्मे
राध्यताम
|
इदमहमनृतात
सत्यमुपैमि
||
That is, hey Agni, fire, God of resolve, I am taking an oath. Give me strength and capability for this. Bless me so that I keep away from untruth and move towards truth. Truly, this, for all of us, is a matter of pride.
I congratulate Shri Chandrika Prasad Santokhi, and, wish him the best on behalf of 130 crore Indians, for serving his nation.
My dear countrymen, it is also the season of rains. Last time too, I had said that the risk of diseases arising out of filth increases during this period. Consequently, it leads to overcrowding in hospitals. I urge you to pay special attention to cleanliness around you and keep taking immunity enhancers such as Ayurvedic kadha. During the times of Corona pandemic, it is imperative that we protect ourselves against other diseases. We will have to take complete care so that we do not have to frequent hospitals.
Friends, during this rainy season, there is a large part of the country that is grappling with floods. Many areas of states like Bihar and Assam are having to deal with a series of difficulties due to floods. On the one hand, we have Corona and on the other we have this challenge. In such a scenario, all Governments, NDRF teams, Disaster response teams, Self help groups are working in tandem to provide relief and rescue in all possible ways. The whole country stands by those affected by this disaster.
Friends, before we meet in the next Mann Ki Baat, 15
th
August would have already arrived. This time, our 15
th
August celebrations too will be in very different circumstances – in the midst of the Corona Virus pandemic.
I urge the youth, the people of my country to take a pledge of freedom from the pandemic this Independence day. Take a resolve for a Self reliant India, a resolve to learn and teach something new and a resolve to earnestly carry out our duties.
The glorious height attained by our country is only due to the Tapasya, the perseverance of many an illustrious soul who dedicated an entire life towards nation building.
One such luminary is Lokmanya Tilak. 1
st
August 2020 will mark the death centenary of Lokmanya Tilak ji. The life of Lokmanya Tilak ji is a source of immense inspiration for all of us; one which teaches us a lot.
The next time we meet, we will once again touch upon myriad things, learn something new together and share it with each other. I urge all of you to take care of yourself and your families and stay healthy. My best wishes to all the countrymen on the forthcoming festivals.
Many Many Thanks.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
Generally, this period is full of festivals; fairs are held at various places; it’s the time for religious ceremonies too. During these times of Corona crises, on the one hand people are full of exaltation and enthusiasm too; and yet in a way there’s also a discipline that touches our heart. Broadly speaking in a way, there is a feeling of responsibility amongst citizens. People are getting along with their day to day tasks, while taking care of themselves and others as well. At every event being organised in the country, the kind of patience and simplicity being witnessed this time is unprecedented. Even Ganeshotsav is being celebrated online at certain places; at most places eco-friendly Ganesh idols have been installed. Friends, if we observe very minutely, one thing will certainly draw our attention- our festivals and the environment. There has always been a deep connect between the two. On the one hand, our festivals implicitly convey the message of co-existence with the environment and nature; on the other, many festivals are celebrated precisely for protecting nature. For example, in West Champaran district of Bihar, people belonging to Thaaru tribal community have been observing a sixty-hour lockdown for centuries…..in their own words- ‘Saath ghante ke Barna’. The Thaaru community has adopted BARNA as a tradition for protection of nature; that too for centuries. During this period, neither does anyone enter the village, nor leave home, and they believe that if they step out or if someone enters from elsewhere, the to and fro movement along with other routine activities of people can lead to the destruction of new plants and trees. Our tribal brothers and sisters begin the Barna lockdown with a grand worship and conclude with jestful traditional tribal songs, music and dance programmes.
Friends, these days, the festival of Onam is also being celebrated with gaiety and fervour. This festival arrives in the month of Chingam. During this period, people buy something new, decorate their homes, prepare Pookalam and enjoy Onam-Saadiya… variety of games and competitions are also held. The zest of Onam today has reached distant shores of foreign lands. Be it America, Europe or Gulf countries, the verve of Onam can be felt everywhere. Onam is increasingly turning out to be an international festival.
Friends, Onam is a festival linked with our agriculture. It is also the time of a new beginning for our rural economy. Our lives, our society derive sustenance from the fortitude of farmers. Their perseverance lends myriad hues to our festivals.
In the Vedas too, our food provider, Annadaata, the life sustaining shakti of our farmers has been gloriously venerated. There is a mantra in Rigved –
Annanam PatayeNamah
Kshetranam PatayeNamah
Which means,
Bow to the food provider
Salute to the farmer.
Even during these trying times of Corona, our farmers have proven their mettle. This time around in our country, sowing of kharif crops has increased by 7 percent compared to last year. The sowing of paddy has increased by approximately 10 percent, pulses close to 5 percent, coarse cereals almost 3 percent, oilseeds around 13 percent and cotton nearly 3 percent. For this I extend felicitations to the farmers of our country…I salute their perseverance.
My dear countrymen, during this time period of Corona, the country is fighting on many fronts simultaneously. But at the same time, the question that frequently comes to mind is, how my young little friends are spending their time while they remain homebound for so long.
And this is why, I, together with the Children University of Gandhinagar, a unique experiment in the world, Indian government’s Ministry of Women and Child Development, Ministry of Education, Ministry of Micro-Small and Medium Enterprises, pondered and deliberated over, what we can do for our children. It was a very useful and pleasant experience for me, because in a way it became an opportunity for me to know and learn something new.
Friends, the subject that we contemplated over was – toys and especially Indian toys. We discussed how to make new toys available to the children of India, how India could become a big hub of toy production. By the way, I apologize to the parents, listening to ‘Mann Ki Baat’, as, after this, they might face an additional task of hearing out new demands for toys. Friends, whereas toys augment activity, they also give flight to our aspirations. Toys, not only entertain, they also build the mind and foster an intent too. I read somewhere what Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore had said about toys, the best toy is that which is incomplete; a toy that children together complete  while playing. Gurudev Tagore had said that during his childhood, he used to make his own toys and games with his friends, with materials available at home, using his own imagination. But, one day elders interfered with those fun-filled moments of childhood. It so happened that one of his friends brought a big and beautiful foreign toy. Now, all their attention was more on flaunting the toy than the game. That toy became the centre of attraction for everyone, not the game. The child who hitherto used to play and mingle with everyone, and remain immersed in the game; the same child started to act aloof. In a way, the feeling of being distinct from the rest of the children, took over his mind. In that expensive toy, there was nothing to create; nor was there anything to learn. That is, an appealing toy had subdued, veiled and withered a brilliant child. This toy exuded pomposity, it exhibited wealth and a little nobility, but it curtailed the growth and grooming of the child’s creative spirit.  The toy remained, but the game was over and the blossoming of the child stopped too. Therefore, Gurudev used to say that, toys should be such that they bring out the childhood of a child and also his or her creativity. In the National Education Policy, a lot of attention has been given on the impact of toys on different aspects of children’s lives. Learning while playing, learning to make toys, visiting toy factories, all these have been made part of the curriculum. Friends, there has been a rich tradition of local toys in our country. There are many talented and skilled artisans who possess expertise in making good toys. Some parts of India are developing also as Toy clusters, that is, as centres of toys. Like, Channapatna in Ramnagaram in Karnataka, Kondaplli in Krishna in Andhra Pradesh, Thanjavur in Tamilnadu, Dhubari in Assam, Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh – there are many such places, we can count many names. You will be surprised to know that the Global Toy Industry is of more than 7 lakh crore rupees. Such a big business of 7 lakh crore rupees but, India’s share is very little in this. Now, just spare a thought for a nation which has so much of heritage, tradition, variety, young population, will it feel good to have such little share in the toy market? Not at all, you too won’t feel good after hearing this. Friends, the toy Industry is very vast. Be it cottage industries, small industries, MSMEs and along with this big industries and private entrepreneurs too come in the ambit of this. The country will have to persevere together to promote this. Further like, there is Mr. C V Raju in Vishakhapatnam of Andhra Pradesh. Once the Eti- Koppakaa toys of his village were very popular. The speciality of these toys – these were made of wood, and secondly, you would not find any angles or corners in these toys anywhere. These toys were round from all sides hence there was no scope for injury to children. C V Raju has now started a sort of a new movement for eti-koppakaa toys along with the artisans of his village. By making excellent quality eti-koppakaa toys C V Raju has brought back the lost glory of these local toys. We can do two things through toys – bring back the glorious past in our lives and also spruce up our golden future. To my start-up friends, to our new entrepreneurs I say- Team up for toys… let us make toys together. For everybody it is the time to get vocal for local toys. Come, let us make some good quality toys for our youth. Toys should be such that in their presence childhood blooms and smiles. Let us make toys which are favourable to the environment too.
Friends, similarly in this era of computers and smartphones, there is a big trend of computer games. These games are played by children and grownups as well. But even in these games, their themes are mostly extraneous. Our country has so many ideas, so many concepts; our history has been very rich. Can we make games based on that? I call upon the young talent of the country – make games in India and make games based on India too. It is also said, Let the game begin! So; let us start the game.
Friends, be it virtual games, be it the sector of toys in the self-reliant India campaign, all have to play very important role, and therein lies an opportunity too. A hundred years ago when the Non-cooperation movement started, Gandhi ji had written – “Non-cooperation movement is an effort to make countrymen realise their self-respect and their power”.
Today, when we are trying to make the country self-reliant, we have to move with full confidence; and make the country self-reliant in every area. A seed that was sown in the form of the Non-cooperation movement, it is now the responsibility of all of us to transform it into banyan tree of self-reliant India.
My dear countrymen, everyone acknowledges the capability of Indians to offer innovation and solutions, when there is dedication and sensitivity, this power becomes limitless. At the beginning of this month an app innovation challenge was put before the youth of the country. Our youth participated enthusiastically in this Aatma Nirbhar Bharat App innovation challenge. Around 7 thousand entries were received; of these too, nearly two thirds have been made by the youth of tier two and tier three cities. This is a very auspicious indication for self-reliant India, for future of the country. You will definitely be impressed on seeing the results of the Aatma Nirbhar Bharat App innovation challenge. After a lot of scrutiny, awards have been given to around two dozen Apps in different categories. Do familiarise yourselves with these Apps and connect with them. It is possible that you too get inspired to make something like that. Among these there is an App ‘Kutuki Kids Learning app. This is an interactive app for children in which they can easily learn many aspects of maths and science through songs and stories. In this, there are activities too and games as well. Similarly, there is also an app for micro blogging platform. Its name is ku KOO.. ku. In this we can place our opinion and interact in our mother tongue through text, video or audio. Similarly,Chingari App too is getting popular among the youth. There is an app Ask Sarkar. In this you can interact through chat bot and can get right information about any government scheme – that too through all the three ways- text, audio and video. It can be a great help to you. There is another app called, S
tep Set Go
. This is a fitness app and it keeps a track of how much you walked, how many calories you burnt; it keeps track of the data and also motivates you to stay fit. I have mentioned just a few examples. Many more apps have also won this challenge. There are many business apps and also gaming apps such as
Is Equal To, Books & Expense, Zoho Workplace
and
FTC Talent
. Search about them on the Net and you will find a lot of information about these apps. Step forward – innovate some; implement some. Your efforts as today’s small start-ups will transform into big companies tomorrow and become mark of India in the world. And you should not forget that the big companies which exist in the world today, were also, once, start-ups.
Dear countrymen, for our children and our students to display their optimum potential, show their mettle; Nutrition and proper nourishment as well play a very big role. The month of September will be observed as Nutrition Month in the entire nation. Nation and Nutriti on are very closely inter-related. We have a maxim – “Yatha Annam Tatha Mannam,” which means our mental and intellectual development is directly related to the quality of our food intake. Experts are of the opinion that the better nutrition a child imbibes in the womb and during childhood, greater is the mental development and he/she remains healthy. It is equally important that for children to be well nourished, the mother also receives proper nourishment. And nutrition merely does not only imply what you eat but also how much you eat and how often you eat. This means whether you are getting essential nutrients. Are you getting Iron, Calcium or not? Sodium or not? Vitamins or not? All these are very important aspects of Nutrition.
In this movement pertaining to nutrition, people’s participation is also very crucial. It is public participation that makes it successful. In our country during the past few years, a lot of effort has been made in this direction. Especially in our villages, it is being converted into a mass movement with public participation. Whether it is the nutrition week or the nutrition month, more and more awareness is being generated through these measures. Schools have been integrated. Efforts are being made to ensure competitions for children, attempts are being made to increase awareness too. Just like there is a Class Monitor in the section, there should be a Nutrition Monitor in a similar manner and just like a report card, a Nutrition Card should also be introduced. These are some of the measures that are being initiated. During the course of the Nutrition Month, a food and nutrition quiz will also be organized on the My Gov portal, and there will be a meme competition as well. So do participate and motivate others too. Friends, if you have had the opportunity to visit the Statue of Unity of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel in Gujarat, and when it opens after Covid Pandemic ends, you will have the opportunity to visit this spot. A unique kind of nutrition park has been created there. You can witness for yourselves nutrition related education along with fun and frolic.
Friends, India is a vast country with a lot of diversity in food and drink. There are six different seasons in our country, different regions produce diverse crops according to the respective climate. Therefore, it is very important that according to the season of a particular region, a well-balanced & nutrient rich, diet plan should be drafted to include  local food grains, fruits and the vegetables cultivated there. Now for example. Millets including coarse grains like Ragi/Finger Millet and Jowar/ Sorghum… these are very beneficial nutritious food. An Agricultural Fund of India is being created, it will have complete information about the crops, that are grown in each district and their related nutritional value. This fund can be of great use for all of you. Come, let us inspire one and all to eat nutritious food and stay healthy during the nutrition month.
Dear countrymen, a few weeks ago, while we were celebrating our Independence Day, an interesting news caught my attention. This is the news of two brave hearts of our security forces. One is Sophie and the other Vida. Sophie and Vida are the dogs of the Indian Army who have been awarded the Chief of Army Staff ‘Commendation Cards’. Sophie and Vida received this honour because they performed their duties diligently while protecting their country. Our armed forces and security forces have many such brave dogs who not only live for the country but also sacrifice themselves for the country. Such canines have played a very important role in thwarting numerous bomb blasts and terrorist conspiracies. Some time ago I got to know in great detail about the role of dogs in the security of the country and also got to hear many stories too. One such canine named Balaram sniffed out ammunition on the route of the Amarnath Yatra. Dog, Bhavana searched out IED in 2002. During unearthing the IED, terrorists triggered an explosion and  brave dog were martyred. Two or three years ago in Bijapur Chattisgarh, a sniffer dog Cracker of CRPF also attained martyrdom in an IED blast. You might have seen a very moving scene on TV a few days ago, in which the Beed Police were giving their canine colleague Rocky a final farewell with all due respect. Rocky had helped the police in solving over 300 cases. Dogs also have a significant role in Disaster Management and Rescue Missions. In India, NDRF, the National Disaster Response Force has specially trained dozens of dogs. In the event of an earthquake, building collapse, these dogs are experts in searching out people trapped under debris.
Friends, I have also been told that Indian breed dogs are also very good and capable. Among the Indian breeds, Mudhol Hound and Himachali Hound are of excellent pedigree. Rajapalayam, Kanni, Chippiparai and Kombai are fabulous Indian breeds. They cost less to raise and are better adapted to the Indian environment and surroundings. Now, our security agencies are also inducting these Indian breed dogs as part of their security squad. In the recent past, Mudhol Hound dogs have been trained and inducted in the dog squad of the Army, CISF and NSG; Kombai dogs have been included by the CRPF. Research on the Indian breed dogs is also being done by the Indian Council of Agriculture Research with the aim to make them better and more beneficial. Search for these breeds on the internet and know more about them – The beauty and qualities of these breeds will leave you astounded! The next time you think of raising a pet dog, consider bringing home one of these Indian breeds. At a time when Atmanirbhar Bharat is becoming a mantra of the people, how can any domain be left untouched by its influence?
My dear countrymen, in a few days from now on September 5th, we will celebrate Teacher’s day. Whenever we think of the successes we have had during the course of our lifetime, we are almost always reminded of one teacher or the other. The fast changing times coupled with the Corona crisis are posing new challenges for our teachers. I am happy that not only have our teachers accepted this challenge but  also turned it into an opportunity. Ways to incorporate more and more technology in studying, ways to imbibe newer tools, ways to help students have been seamlessly embraced by our teachers… they have passed it on to their students as well.  Today, throughout the country, innovation is underway in some field or the other. The students and teachers are collaborating to do something new. I am confident that the way National Education Policy is bringing about a tectonic shift in the nation and that our teachers will play a significant role in disseminating its benefits to our students.
Friends, especially my teacher friends, our country will celebrate the festival of the 75th year of independence in the year 2022. Prior to Independence, our country’s war of independence has had a long history. During that period, there wasn’t any corner of the country where revolutionaries for independence did not lay down their lives or sacrificed their all for the country. It is imperative that today’s generation, our students remain familiar with these heroes of our freedom struggle and feel the quintessence – in their own district & area; what transpired during the freedom movement, who laid down their life, who was imprisoned and for how long – When our students are apprised of the history of the freedom struggle viz-a-viz their local surroundings – – only then will we see the reverberations of it on the personality of the student. A lot of work in this direction needs to be done and our teachers shoulder a significant responsibility for it. For example, the district you live in, were there any events during the course of the freedom struggle in the past centuries? This could also become a topic of research for our students. A handwritten log for schools can be prepared… if there is any place in your town associated with the freedom movement, then a visit could also be planned for the students. Students of some schools can also resolve to write 75 poems and theatrical stories on the heroes of our freedom movement to mark the 75th year of our independence. Your efforts will bring to the fore stories of lakhs of unsung heroes – individuals who lived and died for the country but had faded into oblivion. In the 75th year of our independence, it will be a fitting tribute to remember and recognise the efforts of such individuals. With Teachers day to be observed on September 5th, I call upon all our teacher friends to start preparing and join hands to create an environment bringing everyone into its fold.
My dear countrymen, the country is on the path of progress on which it has embarked upon and this journey will only be comfortable if each and every citizen is a stakeholder in this process and traveller in this journey. For this to happen, it is imperative that each citizen remains hale & hearty and is part of our collective efforts to overcome Corona.  Safeguarding our health by observing, “Do Gaj Ki Doori, Mask Zaroori” following social distancing norms and ensuring to wear masks will help us defeat corona. I urge you to follow these guidelines and I pray for your good health. Stay healthy and stay happy, with these wishes, we will meet again in the next edition of Mann Ki Baat.
Many many thanks.
Namaskar.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
During this ongoing period of Corona, the whole world is going through numerous phases of transformation. Today, when the two yard social distancing has become imperative, this very crises period has also served in fostering bonding among family members, bringing them even closer. But, for such an extended span of time and when you are together, spending time with each other. How do you ensure that every moment is filled with joy? Thus, many a family, faced challenges- and the reason being a lack of our traditions that once used to streamline the course of life through adherence to certain values in the family ‘The Sanskar Sarita.’ It seems, there are many families where all this has been lost…and that is why amid the dearth, it became a little difficult for families to spend time in this period of crisis. And what was an important aspect in this? Well, there was a time when in every family, invariably, there used to be an elderly member, a senior person who would tell stories, infusing a new inspiration, a new energy in the household. Surely, we must have realised, how significant the mores and conventions set by our ancestors are…. even today…. how their dearth can be deeply felt! And, as I said, one such form is the art of storytelling. Friends, the history of stories is as ancient as the human civilization itself. ‘Where there is a soul, there is a story’. Stories express and bring to the fore, the creative and sensitive facets of human beings. If the power of stories is to be felt, one has to just watch a mother telling a story to her little one either to lull her to sleep or while feeding her a morsel. I spent a major part of my life as a Parivrajak, an ascetic. Wayfaring was my life. Every day it used to be a new place and people, new families. But whenever I went to a family, I would make it a point to speak to the children. At times, I would playfully ask them to tell me a story…..surprisingly, they would reply saying, No Uncle…not a story…We’ll tell you a joke! “They would ask me too to tell them a joke; evidently they had no clue of stories. It was jokes that had pervaded their lives, in a major way. In India there has been a rich tradition of storytelling or Qissagoi. We are proud to be denizens of the land that nurtured the tradition of Hitopadesh and Panch Tantra in which, through an imaginary world of animals, birds and fairies woven into stories, lessons on prudence and wisdom could be explained easily. We have a tradition of ‘katha’ here. This is an ancient form of religious storytelling. ‘Kathakalakshepam’ has been part of it. Myriad folk tales are prevalent here. In Tamilnadu and Kerala, there is a very interesting style of storytelling. It is called ‘Villu paat’. It comprises a fascinating confluence of story and music. India has had a vibrant tradition of Kathputli, that is puppetry. These days, stories and storytelling based on science and science- fiction are gaining popularity. I am noticing people who are taking commendable initiatives in promoting the art form of Qissagoi. I came to know about the website ‘Gathastory.in’, run by Amar Vyas, along with other colleagues. Amar Vyas after completing his MBA from IIM Ahmedabad went abroad and later returned. Presently, he lives in Bengaluru and takes time out to pursue an interesting activity such as this, based on storytelling. There are many endeavours that are popularising stories from rural India. People like Vaishali Vyawahare Deshpande are making this form popular in Marathi.
Srividya Veer Raghavan of Chennai is also engaged in popularizing and disseminating stories related to our culture, while two websites named, Kathalaya and The Indian Story Telling Network, are also doing commendable work in this field. Geeta Ramanujan has focussed on stories at kathalaya.org, whereas a network of story tellers from various cities is being created through the Indian Storytelling Network. There is Vikram Sridhar in Bengaluru, who is very enthusiastic about stories related to Bapu. Many more such people must be working in this field. You must share about them on social media.
Today, we are joined by our sister Aparna Athare and other members of the Bengaluru Storytelling Society. Come, let’s talk to them and learn about their experience.
Prime Minister: – Hello
Aparna: – Namaskar, Respected Prime Minister! How are you?
Prime Minister: – I’m fine. How are you, Aparna ji?
Aparna: – Very well Sir. First of all, I would like to thank you on behalf of Bangalore Story Telling Society for having invited and speaking to artists like us on this platform.
Prime Minister: – And I heard, that today, perhaps your entire team is also sitting with you.
Aparna: – Yes, yes. Absolutely sir.
Prime Minister: – Then it would be better if you introduce your team. So that the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ can get acquainted with what a huge campaign you all are running.
Aparna: – Sir. I am Aparna Athare. I am a mother of two children, the wife of an Air Force Officer and a passionate storyteller sir. Storytelling began 15 years ago when I was working in the software industry. Having gone then for voluntary work for CSR projects, I got a chance to educate thousands of children through the medium of stories. And this story I was referring to… I had heard it from my grandmother. But when I saw the joy on the children’s faces while listening to the story, what do I say to you…. such smiles, so much happiness there… and that was the moment I decided that story telling would be a goal of my life sir.
Prime Minister: – Who else is there in your team?
Aparna: – Shailaja Sampath is with me.
Shailaja: – Namaskar sir.
Prime Minister: – Namaste Ji |
Shailaja: – I am Shailaja Sampath speaking. Earlier, I was a teacher. Once my children grew up, I started working in theatre and finally, felt most satisfied in storytelling.
Prime Minister: – Thank you!
Shailaja: – Soumya is with me.
Soumya: – Namaskar Sir!
Prime Minister: – Namaste Ji!
Soumya: – I am Soumya Srinivasan. I am a psychologist. When I work, with children and older people, I try to awaken the Navrasas in human beings through stories and discuss it with them. ‘Healing and transformative storytelling’ is my goal.
Aparna: – Namaste Sir!
Prime Minister: – Namaste Ji |
Aparna: My name is Aparna Jaishankar. I have had the good fortune of growing up with my maternal grandparents and paternal grandmother in different parts of the country, so stories from Ramayana, Puranas, Geeta every night, were an inheritance. And then, there is this organization like Bangalore Storytelling Society, so I had to be a storyteller. My fellow Lavanya Prasad is with me.
PP Prime Minister:- Lavanya ji, Namastey!
Lavanya: -Namastey, Sir! I am an Electrical Engineer turned professional storyteller. Sir, I grew up listening to stories from my grandfather. I work with senior citizens. In my special project called ‘Roots’ where I help them document their life stories for their families.
Prime Minister: – Lavanya ji many congratulations to you. And as you said, once in Mann Ki Baat I too had asked you all that if you have grandfather-grandmother, maternal grandfather-grandmother in your family, ask them of stories of their childhood and tape them, record them, it will be very useful, I had said. But I felt good that the way all of you introduced yourself…. even in that… your art, your communication skills and in very few words, in a very good way you introduced yourself, for that too I congratulate you.
Lavanya: -Thank you sir! Thank you!
Prime Minister: – Now our audience of Mann Ki Baat… they too must be wanting to hear a story. May I request you to narrate a story or two?
Chorus: – For sure, this is our good fortune.
Aparna Jaishankar: – “Come, let us hear the story of a king. The name of the king was Krishna Deva Rai and the name of the kingdom was Vijayanagar. This king of ours had many qualities. If at all there was any weakness, it was his excessive fondness for his minister Tenali Rama and secondly for food. Every day the king would sit for lunch with great hope that today something good must have been cooked and everyday his cook would serve the same insipid vegetables-ridge gourd, bottle gourd, pumpkin, apple gourd. One such day, the king while eating, threw away the plate in anger and ordered the cook to make some tasty vegetable the day after or else he would hang him. The poor cook was frightened. Now where would he go for new vegetables? The cook went running directly to Tenali Rama and told him the entire story. On listening, Tenali Rama gave an idea to the cook. Then next day the king came for lunch and called for the cook. Has something tasty has been cooked today or should I prepare the noose? The frightened cook immediately lay the plate with hot food. There was a new dish in the plate. The king was excited and he tasted a little of the dish. Umm, wow! What a dish! Neither tasteless like ridge gourd nor sweet like pumpkin. The cook too had put the spices after roasting and grinding and all had come off well. Licking his fingers, the king called the cook and asked… “What vegetable is it? What is its name?” The cook replied as he was taught. “Maharaj, this is the crown-crested brinjal. Lord, just like you this too is the king of vegetables and that is why the rest of the vegetables have adorned it with a crown.” The king was pleased and declared that from today he would eat only this crown crested brinjal. “And not only myself, in my kingdom too, only brinjal will be cooked and no other vegetable will be cooked.” Both, the king and the subjects were pleased. Initially, all were happy as they got a new vegetable, but as days passed by the excitement began going down. Mashed brinjal in one house, then fried brinjal in the other. Sambhar with brinjal at one place and brinjal with rice at the other. How many forms could the poor brinjal alone have? Gradually even the king got fed up. Every day the same brinjal! And then the day came when the king called the cook and scolded him a lot. “Who told you that the brinjal is crown crested. Hereafter, no one will eat brinjal in the kingdom. From tomorrow cook any vegetable but the brinjal.” “As you order Maharaja,” saying this the cook went straight to Tenali Rama. Falling at feet of Tenali Rama, he said, “thank you minister you saved my life. Because of your suggestion now I can serve any vegetable to the king.” Tenali Rama laughingly said, “What good is that minister who cannot keep his king pleased.” And like this the stories of King Krishnadeva Rai and minister Tenali Rama kept on evolving and people kept listening. Thanks.
Prime Minister: – You had such exactness in narration, you touched upon so many fine details, I understand that children, adults whoever listens to this will remember many things. You narrated in such a nice way and what a special co-incidence that nutrition week is going on in the country and your story is connected to food. And, definitely, I urge storytellers like you and other people to find ways to connect the new generation of our country with lives of great men and women through stories; we should also think of ways to publicise the art of storytelling, popularise it in every home specially with good stories for children…. Telling good stories to children should be a part of public life. We should work together in that direction, in creating that atmosphere. But I felt very nice talking to all of you. Best wishes to all of you. Thank you.
Chorus: Thank you sir.
We heard these sisters who carry forward the unending stream of our traditions through the medium of storytelling. When I was talking to them on the phone, it was such a lengthy conversation and then I felt that there is a time limit for ‘Mann Ki Baat’, so I‘ve decided to upload all the things that we spoke about on my NarendraModiApp–you can definitely listen the entire stories on the app. In this ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I have presented for you only a tiny excerpt! I would definitely urge you to take out sometime in the family every week for stories, and you can also allot every family member, for a given week, a topic, like, say compassion, sensitivity, valour, sacrifice, bravery – choose any one sentiment to be dwelt upon by all members of the family, that week and everybody will source out a story on the same subject and all of the family members in a group will tell individual tales!
You will see, what a huge treasure will get accrued in the family, how great research work will get carried out and how much delight it will bring to everyone! And a new life, a new energy will be generated in the family – in the same way we can carry out another task. I urge all storytellers that soon we are going to celebrate 75 years of independence, can we propagate in our stories as many inspiring events as there were during the entire period of our enslavement! Especially, from 1857 to 1947, we can introduce every major or minor incident of this period to our new generation through stories. I am sure that you folks will definitely do this work. May this art of storytelling become stronger in the country, become more popularized and easier to imbibe- This is something we must all strive for!
My dear countrymen, come, let us now travel across the seven seas from the world of stories, listen to this voice!
“Namaste, brothers and sisters, my name is Seedu Dembele. I am from Mali, a country in West Africa. I had the opportunity to attend Kumbh Mela, the largest religious festival in India, in February. It is a matter of great pride for me. I felt good on being a part of Kumbh Mela and got to learn a lot about the culture of India by observing. I request that we be given the opportunity to visit India, once again so that we can learn more about India. Namaste.”
PM – Is it not interesting? So this was Sedu Dembele from Mali. Mali is a large and land locked country in West Africa, far from India. Sedu Dembele, is a teacher in a public school in Kita, a town in Mali, and teaches English, Music, Painting, and drawing. But he also has another identity – people call him Hindustani’s Babu, and, he takes great pride in being called so. Every Sunday afternoon, he presents an hour long radio program in Mali entitled ‘Indian frequency on Bollywood songs!’ He has been presenting it for the last 23 years. During the course of this program, he renders his commentary in French as well as in Mali’s lingua franca known as Bombara, and does it in quite a dramatic fashion. He has deep seated love for India. Another reason for his profound association with India is that, he was also born on 15thAugust. Seduji has started another two-hour program now at 9 pm every Sunday, in which he narrates the story of an entire Bollywood film in French and Bombara.
Sometimes while relating to an emotional scene, he, along with his listeners, cry together! Seduji’s father had introduced him to Indian culture. His father worked in a cinema theatre where Indian films were also exhibited. On this 15th August, through a video in Hindi, he greeted the people of India on Independence Day. Today, his children sing the national anthem of India with great ease! You must watch both of these videos and feel their love for India. When Seduji visited Kumbh and at that time he was part of the delegation that I met, his passion for India, affection and love are indeed a matter of pride for all of us.
My dear countrymen, it is said here that the one who is rooted to the ground, is equally firm during the course of the biggest of storms. In this difficult period of Corona, our agricultural sector, our farmers are a living testimony to this. Even in this time of crisis, the agricultural sector of our country has again shown its resilience. Friends, the agricultural sector of the country, our farmers, our villages are the very basis of Atmanirbhar Bharat, a self reliant India. If they remain strong then the foundation of Atmanirbhar Bharat will remain strong. In the recent past, these areas have liberated themselves from many restrictions and tried to break free from many myths. I get many such letters from farmers, I’ve had a dialogue with farmer organizations, who inform me about new dimensions being added to the farming sector and the changes it is undergoing. What I have heard from them and whatever I have heard from others, I feel that today in Mann Ki Baat, I must tell you some things about those farmers. One such of our farmer brother lives in Sonipat district of Haryana, his name is Shri Kanwar Chauhan.
He told us how there was a time when he used to face great difficulties in marketing his fruits and vegetables outside the mandi, the market place. If he used to sell his fruits and vegetables outside the mandi, then, many a times his produce and carts would get confiscated. But, in 2014, fruits and vegetables were excluded from the APMC Act, which, greatly benefited him and fellow farmers in the neighborhood. Four years ago, he, along with fellow farmers of his village, formed a Farmer Producer’s Organization. Today farmers in the village cultivate sweet corn and baby corn. Their produce is being supplied directly to Azadpur Mandi, Delhi, Big Retail Chains and Five Star Hotels. Today, the farmers of the village are earning rupees two and a half to three lakhs per acre annually by cultivating sweet corn and baby corn. Not only this, more than 60 farmers of this village, through construction of net house and poly house are producing various varieties of tomato, cucumber and capsicum and earning from 10 to 12 lakh rupees per acre every year.
Do you know what is different with these farmers? They have the power to sell their fruits and vegetables, anywhere and to anyone! And this power is the foundation of their progress. Now this power has also been imparted to other farmers of the country not only for marketing of the fruits and vegetables but whatever they are producing or cultivating in their fields, – paddy, wheat, mustard, sugarcane, whatever they are growing they have now got the freedom to sell where they can get a higher price according to their wish.
Friends, about three or four years ago fruits and vegetables were excluded from the purview of APMC in Maharashtra. An example of how this reform changed the state of farmers growing fruits and vegetables in Maharashtra is provided by Sri Swami Samarth Farm Producer Company limited – a Farmer Producer’s Organization. Farmers in Pune and Mumbai are themselves running weekly markets. In these markets, the produce of about four and a half thousand farmers, of nearly 70 villages, is sold directly without any middleman! The rural youth are directly involved in the process of farming and selling to this market. This directly benefits the farmers and the youth of the village are gainfully employed.
Another example is from then district of Tamil Nadu, here the Tamil Nadu Banana farmer produce company; This Farmer Produce Company is a company just in name; in reality, these farmers together have formed a collective. It has a very flexible system, and that too has evolved five-six years ago. This Farmer Collective purchased hundreds of metric tons of vegetables, fruits and Bananas from nearby villages during the lockdown, and supplied a vegetable combo kit to the city of Chennai.
You just think, how many youth did they employed, and the interesting fact is that, due to absence of middlemen, not only the farmer profited but the consumer also benefited. One such group of farmers hails from Lucknow. They named themselves the Iraada; Farmer Producer and they too during the lockdown, procured fruits and vegetables directly from the cultivators’ fields, and sold directly in the markets of Lucknow, free from the middlemen, and got whatever price they demanded. Friends, Ismail Bhai is a farmer in Rampura village of Banaskantha in Gujarat. His story is also very interesting. Ismail Bhai wanted to do farming, but, now, as is these general attitude towards farming, his family raised eyebrows on the thoughts of Ismail Bhai! Ismail Bhai’s father was into farming, but in that, he often incurred losses. Hence the father dissuaded…yet despite family members discouraging, Ismail Bhai decided that he would certainly take up farming. Ismail Bhai had resolved that he would dispel the notion of farming being a loss making activity and change the situation as well. He started farming, albeit using new methods and innovative techniques. Using drip irrigation he cultivated potatoes…. and today his potatoes are his hallmark. He is growing potatoes that are of very high quality. Ismail Bhai directly sells these potatoes to large companies, the middle men are just out of the question. And the result – he is earning handsome profits. He now has repaid all the debts of his father. And do you know the most significant fact? Today, Ismail Bhai is helping hundreds of farmers in his region. He is changing their lives too.
Friends, in present-times, the more modern alternatives we offer for agriculture, the more it will progress with newer innovations and techniques. Bijay Shanti of Manipur is in the news for her new innovation. She launched a start-up to develop thread from the Lotus stem. Today, her efforts and innovations have opened new avenues in the fields of lotus farming and textile.
My dear countrymen, I want to transport you to a period from our past. It is a tale of 101 years ago. The year was 1919. The British rulers had slaughtered innocent civilians at Jallianwala Bagh. Post the massacre, a 12 year old boy visited the spot. A happy and agile boy but what he saw at Jallianwala Bagh was beyond his imagination. He was left stunned at how one could be so merciless. This innocent boy had started to burn in the fire of anger. At Jallianwala Bagh, he took a vow to fight the British rule. Did you come to know who am I referring to? Yes! I am speaking about Shahid Veer Bhagat Singh. Tomorrow, the 28th of September, we will celebrate the birth anniversary of Shahid Veer Bhagat Singh. I join my fellow countrymen in bowing before the paragon of courage and bravery, Shaheed Veer Bhagat Singh. Can you imagine that an Empire, which ruled over a huge chunk of the world, it was often said that the Sun never sets on this empire – such a powerful empire was terrified of this 23 year old. Shaheed Bhagat Singh was as much a fighter as he was a scholar, a thinker. Bhagat Singh along with his revolutionary friends, without caring for their own selves, carried out such daring acts, which had a huge bearing in the country attaining Freedom. Another appealing aspect of Shahid Veer Bhagat Singh’s life is that he appreciated the importance of teamwork. Be it his devotion towards Lala Lajpat Rai or his camaraderie with fellow revolutionaries as ChandraShekhar Azad, Sukhdev, Rajguru amongst others, personal accolades were of no importance to him. He had a single mission for as long as he lived and he sacrificed his life for that mission – That mission was to free India of injustice and the British rule. I read a comment by Ajay SG from Hyderabad on the NaMo app. Ajay ji writes – How can today’s youth strive to be like Bhagat Singh? Well see ; We may or may not be able to become like Bhagat Singh, but the love Bhagat Singh had for his country, the drive and motivation he had to do something for his country certainly resides in all our hearts. That would be our biggest tribute to Shahid Bhagat Singh. Four years ago, around this time, the world witnessed the courage, bravery and valiance of our soldiers during the Surgical Strike. Our brave soldiers had just one mission and one goal – To protect at all costs, the glory and honour of Mother India. They did not care a bit for their own selves. They marched forward on their path of duty and we all witnessed how they came out victorious. They enhanced Mother India’s pride.
My dear countrymen, in the coming days, we countrymen will remember many great personalities who have made an indelible contribution in the making of India. 2nd of October is an auspicious and inspirational day for all of us. This day, we remember two great sons of Ma Bharati – Mahatma Gandhi and Lal Bahadur Shastri.
Revered Bapu’s thoughts and ideals are more relevant now than earlier. The economic principles of Mahatma Gandhi, if we would have been able to understand their spirit, grasp it and practically implement them, then the Aatmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyaan would not have been needed today. Gandhiji’s economic vision understood the pulse of the country and had the fragrance of India in them. Revered Bapu’s life reminds us to ensure that all our actions should be such that it leads to the well being of the poor and deprived. Likewise, Shastriji’s life imparts to us the message of humility and simplicity. 11th of October is also a special day for us. This day, we remember Bharat Ratna Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan ji on his birth anniversary. JP played a pioneering role in safeguarding our Democratic values. We also remember Bharat Ratna Nanaji Deshmukh, whose birth anniversary is also on the 11th Nanaji Deshmukh was a close companion of Jayaprakash Narayan ji. When JP was fighting the crusade against corruption, a potentially fatal attack was carried out on him in Patna. It was Nanaji Deshmukh then, who took the blow onto himself. Nanaji Deshmukh was grievously injured in this attack but he managed to successfully save the life of JP. This 12th of October is the birth anniversary of Rajmata Vijaya Raje Scindia ji too – She had dedicated her entire life in the service of the people. She was from a royal family and had no dearth of wealth, power and other resources. Even then, she spent her whole life in public service, just like a mother would with the same devotion with Vatsalya Bhava. She had a very generous heart. This October 12th will mark the conclusion of her birth centenary year celebrations and today when I speak about Rajmata ji, I am reminded of an emotional incident. I have had the opportunity to have worked with her for many years, there are many incidents to recall. However, I feel like sharing one particular incident. We were on the ‘Ekta Yatra’, spanning Kanyakumari to Kashmir. The yatra was moving under the leadership of Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi ji. It was harsh winters, months of December-January. Past midnight, around 12 or 1, we reached Shivpuri, near Gwalior in Madhya Pradesh. At the place where we would stay, since we would all be tired from the day’s travels, we would freshen up and sleep and prepare for the morning as well. It was around 2, when I, after having showered and freshened up was preparing to sleep, when I heard a knock on the door. I opened the door and it was Rajmata Sahab who was standing in front of me. I was astounded to see Rajmata Sahab, that too on such a cold winter night. I offered my pranaam and said – ‘Mother, you at this midnight hour?’ She said ‘No son, here…Modi ji, you have this warm milk and sleep thereafter’. She had herself brought turmeric milk. However, when I looked to the other side, it was not just me! The entire travelling establishment of the Yatra, around 30-40 people including our drivers and other workers….She visited each room and herself ensured that all of us had milk at 2 in the night! I can never forget this incident as it taught me about the love of a mother and motherly affections. It is our good fortune that such great personalities have reared the soil of India with their sacrifice and their tapasya. Come, let us all strive together to build such an India, on which these great personalities would pride themselves. Their dreams should be our motivation!
My dear countrymen, in this Corona time-period, I would once again remind you – Always wear a mask and do not venture out without a face shield. ‘Do Gaz ki doori’, social distancing will protect you and your family. These few rules are the weapons in our fight against Corona, a powerful resource to save the life of every citizen. And let us not forget, till the time we have any vaccine, we will not let up in our efforts. You stay healthy, your family stays healthy, with these wishes, I thank you all!
Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
Today is the festival of Vijaydashami, that is Dussehra. On this auspicious occasion, heartiest greetings to all of you. The festival of Dussehra is one of the triumph of truth over untruth. But, simultaneously, it is also the festival of victory of patience over crises. Today, all of you are carrying on with immense patience, celebrating the festival with restraint….and hence, in our ongoing fight, our victory too is assured. Earlier, people used to throng Durga Pandals for a Darshan of Maa. The atmosphere would be almost that of a carnival…but it was not possible this time. Earlier, grand fairs used to be held on the occasion of Dussehra…but in present times, they took on a different form. The festival of Ramleela too was one of its major attractions….but now, that too has been restricted to some extent. Earlier during Navratra, the notes of Garba of Gujarat would reverberate all over….this time all grand events have been curtailed. Many more festivals are on the way in the days to come. There is Eid, Sharad Poornima, Valmiki Jayanti, followed by Dhanteras, Diwali, Bhai dooj, the Pooja of Chatthi Maiyya and the birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev ji…..during this crisis-laden period of Corona, we have to exercise patience, observe restraint.
Friends,
When we talk about festivals and make preparations for them, the first thought that strikes us is when to go to the market, what all has to be purchased. Children especially are enthusiastic about it, wondering what they would receive this time in the festival season. The fervour of festivals and the glitter and sparkle of the marketplace are interconnected. But this time when you go shopping, do remember our resolve of ‘Vocal for Local’. While purchasing items from the market, we have to accord priority to local products.
Friends,
Amid the gaiety of festivities, we should spare a thought for the lockdown period. During the lockdown, we closely came to know about those members of society, without whom our lives would be miserable. Sanitation workers, brothers and sisters working as domestic helps, local vegetable vendors, milkmen, security guards….we have now felt the significance of their roles in our lives in a better way. During the moment of crisis, they were with you; they stood by all of us. Now, during the festivities, amid the rejoicing, we must take them along. I earnestly urge you to ensure, in whatever way, in making them a part of your celebrations. Treat them as members of your own family…..you will see for yourself how your joy rises by leaps and bounds.
Friends,
We must also think of our braveheart soldiers who are firmly stationed on our borders in the line of duty, even during these festive times…all in the service and security of Mother India. We have to celebrate our festivals bearing them in mind. We have to light a lamp at home in honour of these brave sons and daughters of Mother India. I would also like to assure our brave soldiers that despite they being away at the borders, the entire country is with them, wishing well for them. I also salute the sacrifice of those families, whose sons and daughters are on the border today. I express gratitude to each and every person who is away from home and family on account of discharging duty to the country in one way or the other.
My dear countrymen,
Today when we are going vocal for local, the whole world are also becoming a fan of our local products. Many of our local products have the potential of becoming global. One such example is Khadi. Khadi has remained a symbol of simplicity over a long period of time but now our khadi is getting known as an eco friendly fabric. In terms of health, this is a body friendly fabric, an all weather fabric and now it has also become a fashion statement.
Not only is the popularity of khadi rising it is also being produced in many places of the world. There is a place in Mexico called Oaxaca, there are many villages in this area where the local villagers weave khadi. Today the khadi of this place has gained popularity by the name Oaxaca khaadi. How khadi reached Oaxaca is no less interesting. In fact a young person of Oaxaca, Mark Brown once watched a movie on Mahatma Gandhi. Brown got so inspired by watching this movie on Bapu that he visted Bapu’s ashram in India, understood him and learnt about him in depth. It was then, that Brown realised that khadi was not just a cloth; it was a complete way of life. Brown was deeply moved by the way khadi was intertwined with the rural economy and self sufficiency. It was here that Brown resolved to work on khadi on his return to Mexico. He introduced the villagers of Oaxaca in Mexico to khadi and trained them. And now Oaxaca khadi has become a brand. The website of this project bears the inscription ‘the symbol of Dharma in motion’. You can also find a very interesting interview of Marc Brown on this website. He narrates that initially the people were wary of khadi but ultimately they got interested and a market got ready for it. He states that these are matters related to Ram Rajya, when you fulfill the needs of the people, the people start connecting with you.
Friends,
This time on Gandhi Jayanti the khadi store in Cannaught Place at Delhi witnessed purchases of over one crore rupees in just a day. Similarly the khadi masks have also become very popular during Corona. Self help groups and other such institutions are making khadi masks in many places of the country. There is a woman Suman Devi Ji in Barabanki of U.P. Suman ji , alongwith her friends of a self help group started making Khadi masks.
Gradualy more and more women started joining her and now together they are producing thousands of khadi masks. Our local products have this beauty that often a complete philosophy is enshrined in them.
My dear countrymen,
When we take pride in our own things, the world’s curiosity around them also grows – Just like our spirituality, Yoga, Ayurveda has attracted the whole world. Many of our indigenous sports also attract attention the world over. Nowadays our Mallakhambh too is gaining popularity in many countries. When Chinmay Patankar and Pragya Patankar decided to teach Mallakhambh out of their home in America, little did they know how successful it would be. Mallakhambh training centers are running at many locations across America. A large number of American Youth are joining and learning Mallakhambh. Be it Germany, Poland or Malaysia – Mallakhambh is becoming popular in around 20 other countries. And now, its World Championship has also been started which sees participants from many countries. Ancient India had many such sports which would bring about extraordinary growth within oneself – they give new dimensions to our mind and body balance. However, probably our young friends of the new generation are not that acquainted with Mallakhambh. Do search more about it on the internet and see for yourself.
Friends,
Our country has many forms of martial arts. I would like our young friends to know more about them learn them and over the course of time bring about innovations in the same. When there are no major challenges to face in one’s life, the best of one’s personality also fails to surface – hence always keep on challenging yourselves.
My dear countrymen,
It is said that learning is growing. Today in Mann ki baat I will introduce you to a person who has a novel passion. This is the passion of sharing the joys of reading and writing with others. He is Pon Mariyappan from Thoothukudi in Tamil Nadu. Thoothukudi is also known as the Pearl City. Once it was an important centre of the Pandyan Empire. My friend from this town Pon Marriyappan is associated with the profession of hair cutting and runs a salon. A very small salon. He has done an exemplary and an inspiring piece of work. He has converted a small portion of his salon into a library. If a customer, while waiting for his turn, reads something from the library and writes on that, Pon Marriyappan, offers him a discount…..isn’t it intresting?
Come lets go to Thoothukudi …lets talk to Pon Mariyyapan ji
P.M. Pon Marriyyapan ji Vannakaam, How are you?
Pon : Respected Prime Minister, Vanakkam
P.M: Vanakkam vanakm, how did you get the idea of this library?
Pon Mariyappan: I have studied up to class 8th. I could not further my studies beyond that due to family circumstances. When I see educated people, I feel something amiss in me. So, I thought why not establish a library, which would benefit many people, this became an inspiration for me.
Prime Minister: Which book do you like a lot ?
Pon Mariyappan: ‘Thirukkural’ is very dear to me.
Prime Minister: I felt very happy talking to you. Best wishes to you.
Pon Mariyappan: I too am feeling extremely happy while talking to respected Prime Minister.
Prime Minister: Best wishes
Pon Mariyappan: Thank you Prime Minister Ji.
Prime Minister: Thank you.
We just spoke to Pon Mariyappan ji. See how he dresses people’s hair, he gives them an opportunity to dress up their lives too. It felt nice to learn about the popularity of Thirukkural. All of you too heard about the populairity of Thirukkural. Today, Thirukkural is available in all languages of India. Given an opportunity, one must read it. In a way, it is a guide for life.
Friends,
But you will be happy to know that all over India there are several people who get immense happiness spreading knowledge. These are people who are always eager to get everyone inspired to study. A teacher from Singrauli in Madhya Pradesh, Usha Dubey ji in fact, has turned a scooty into a mobile library. Every day she goes to some village or the other with her mobile library and teaches children there. Children lovingly call her ‘kitabon waali Didi’, the elder sister with books. This year in August, at Rayo village in Nirjuli of Arunachal Pradesh, a Self Help Library has been set up. In fact, when Meena Gurung and Dewang Hosayi from this village learnt that there was no library in the area they extended a hand for its funding. You will be surprised to know that there is no membership for this library. Anyone can borrow books for two weeks. One has to return them after reading. This library is open all seven days, 24 hours. Parents around are quite happy that their children are busy reading books… especially when schools too have started online classes. In Chandigarh, Sandeep Kumar who runs an NGO has set up a mobile library in a mini van, through which, poor children are given books to read free of cost. Along with this I know two organisations in Bhav Nagar, Gujarat which are doing marvellous work. Of these one is Vikas Vartul Trust. This organisation is very helpful to students who are preparing for competitive exams. This trust has been working since 1975 and provides 140 magazines, along with 5000 books. ‘Pustak Parab’ is a similar organization. This in an innovative project which provides literary books along with other books, free of cost. In this library, books related to spirituality, ayurvedic treatment and many other subjects also are included. If you are aware of other such initiatives, I urge you to certainly share that on social media. These examples are not limited just to reading books or opening libraries, but are also symbolic of that spirit of the New India, where in every field, people of every stratum are adopting innovative ways for the development of the society. It has been mentioned in the Geeta-
Na hi gyanen sadrishyam pavitramih vidyate.
Meaning, there is nothing as sacred as knowledge in this world. Those who spread knowledge, who take such noble initiatives, I commend all such great people from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen,
In a few days we will celebrate Sardar Vallabh Bhai Patel’s birth anniversary, the 31st of October as ‘National Unity Day’. Earlier too, we have talked in detail on Sardar Patel in Mann Ki Baat. We have talked about the many dimensions of his great personality. You will come across few people whose personality has so many elements- depth of thoughts, moral courage, political genius, in depth knowledge of the field of agriculture and spirit of commitment to national unity. Do you know of one thing that showcases the sense of humour of Sardar Pate? Just visualize the image of the Iron-man who was interacting simultaneously with kings and royalty, managing the mass movements of revered Bapu, and also fighting against the British… and in all these his sense of humour too was in full form. Bapu had said that the jestful banter of Sardar Patel made him laugh so much that he would get cramps in the stomach. This happened not just once but several times during the day. In it there is a lesson for us too… keep alive your sense of humour irrespective of how difficult the situations are, not only will this keep us at ease; we will be able to find solutions to our problems. This is exactly what Sardar sahib did.
My dear countrymen,
Sardar Patel devoted his entire life for the unity of the country. He integrated the Indian public with the Freedom Movement. He endeavored to connect the issues of farmers with Independence. He worked for the integration of the Princely States with our nation. He was invoking the mantra of ‘unity in diversity’ in the mind of every Indian.
Friends,
Today through our speech, our bearing and our actions, every moment we have to carry forward the entire spectrum of values that unite us… so that a sense of ease and belongingness is inculcated in the mind of the citizen living in one part of the country for the citizen living in the other. Our ancestors have made these efforts incessantly for centuries. Now, for example His Holiness Adi Shankaracharya was born in Kerala and established four important mathas in all four directions of India… Badrikashram in the North, Puri in the East, Sringeri in the South and Dwarka in the West. He also traveled to Srinagar and that is the reason, a ‘Shankracharya Hill’ exists there.
Pilgrimage in itself knits India in a common thread; the chain of Jyotirlingas and Shaktipeethas binds India with the common thread. Our centres of faith established from Tripura to Gujarat and from Jammu and Kashmir to Tamil Nadu, unite us as one. The Bhakti movement became a mass movement throughout India, uniting us through Bhakti, devotion.These elements with the strength of unity have been assimilated in our day to day lives. The various rivers in our country are invoked before each ritual, ranging from the Indus located in the far north to the Kaveri, the lifeline of South India. Often people in our country say or chant while bathing with a hallowed belief, the mantra of unity:
GangeCheYamuneChaive Godavari Saraswati.
Narmade Sindhu Kaveri Jale asminn Sannidhim Kuru
Similarly, the holy sites of Sikhs include ‘Nanded Sahib’ and ‘Patna Sahib’ Gurdwaras. Our Sikh Gurus too have enriched the spirit of unity through their lives and noble deeds.
In the last century, in our country, we have had luminaries such as Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar who forged unity among us all through the medium of the Constitution.
Friends,
Unity is Power, Unity is strength,
Unity is Progress, Unity is Empowerment,
United we will scale new heights
Although, there have also been forces which continuously try to sow the seeds of suspicion in our minds, and try to divide the country. The country too has given a befitting reply to these ill-intentions every time. We have to constantly try through our creativity and love to bring out the beautiful colors of ‘Ek Bharat-Shrestha Bharat’ even in the smallest of our tasks! New colors of unity have to be filled in, and every citizen must fill them. In this context, I urge all of you to visit a website – ekbharat.gov.in. This website displays our many efforts made to advance our campaign of national integration. It also has an interesting corner –The sentence for the day. In this section, we can learn how to speak a sentence in different languages ​​every day. You can also contribute to this website, for example every state and its culture has different kinds of cuisines. These dishes are made with special local ingredients comprising grains and spices. Can we share the recipe of these local foods along with the names of the local ingredients, on the ‘Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat’ website?
What can be a better way to propagate unity and immunity! Friends, on the 31stof this month, I will have the opportunity to attend many events to be held in and around the historic Statue of Unity in Kevadiya…do connect with these.
My dear countrymen,
On the 31st of October we will also celebrate ‘Valmiki Jayanti’. I pay my obeisance to Maharishi Valmiki and extend my heartiest greetings to the countrymen on this special occasion. Maharishi Valmiki’s lofty ideals continue to inspire millions of people and provide them strength. He is a beacon of great hope for millions of the impoverished and Dalits… instills hope and trust within them. He says that if anyone has will power, one can achieve anything with ease. It is this will power, which provides the strength to many young people to do extraordinary things.
Maharishi Valmiki emphasized positive thinking – for him, the spirit of service and human dignity were of utmost importance. Maharishi Valmiki’s conduct, thoughts and ideals are the inspiration and guiding force for our resolve for a New India. We will always be grateful to Maharishi Valmiki for composing an epic like Ramayana to guide the future generations.
On the 31st of October we lost former Prime Minister of India, Smt. Indira Gandhi. I most respectfully pay my tributes to her.
My dear countrymen,
Today, Pulwama in Kashmir is playing an important role in educating the entire country. Today, when children all over the nation do their homework, or prepare notes, somewhere behind this lies the hard work of the people of Pulwama! The Kashmir Valley meets almost 90% demand for the Pencil Slats, timber casings of the entire country, and of that, a very large share comes from Pulwama. Once upon a time we used to import wood for pencils from abroad, but, now our Pulwama is making the country self-sufficient in the field of pencil making. In fact, these Pencil Slats of Pulwama are reducing the gaps between states! Chinar wood of the valley has high moisture content and softness, which makes it most suitable for the manufacture of pencils. In Pulwama, Oukhoo is known as the Pencil Village. Here, several manufacturing units of Pencil Slats are located, which provide employment, and, in these units, a large number of women are employed.
Friends,
Pulwama gained this recognition when individuals of this place decided to do something new, took risks and dedicated themselves towards it. One such enterprising person is Manzoor Ahmad Alai. Earlier, Manzoor bhai was a simple workman involved in woodcutting. Manzoor bhai wanted to do something new so that his coming generations wouldn’t have to live in poverty. He sold his ancestral land and established a unit to manufacture Apple wooden boxes. He was engaged in his small business when he came to know that Poplar wood , Chinar wood is being used in manufacturing pencils. After getting this information, Manzoor bhai channeled his entrepreneurial spirit and started the supply of Poplar wooden boxes to some famous pencil manufacturing units. Manzoor Ji found this to be extremely profitable and his income grew considerably at the same time. With the passage of time, he bought pencil slat manufacturing machinery and started the supply of pencil slats to some of the biggest companies of the country. Today, Manzoor bhai’s turnover from this business is in crores and is a source of livelihood for around two hundred people. Today, through Mann Ki Baat, I, on behalf of all countrymen commend Manzoor bhai and the enterprising brothers and sisters of Pulwama along with their families – All of you are making invaluable contribution in educating the young minds of our country.
My dear countrymen,
During the lockdown, many instances of technology based service delivery were explored in the country and it is not that only the big technology and logistic companies are capable of the same. A self help group of women in Jharkhand have accomplished this feat. These women worked to deliver vegetables and fruits to households directly from the fields of the farmers.These women got an app ‘Ajivika Farm Fresh’ designed through which people could directly order vegetables to be delivered at their homes. Through this initiative, the farmers were ensured of a fair price for their produce and fresh vegetables were also available for the buyers. This idea of ‘Ajivika farm fresh’ app is gaining a lot of popularity there – fruits and vegetables worth more than 50 Lakhs were delivered by them during the lockdown. Friends, with emerging possibilities in the agriculture sector, more and more youth are now engaging themselves in this field. Atul Patidar of Barwani in Madhya Pradesh has connected four thousand farmers in his area through the digital medium. Through the E-platform farm card of Atul Patidar, farmers are now able to get the essentials of agriculture – such as fertilizer, seeds, pesticide, fungicide etc home delivered – the farmers get what they need at their doorstep. Modern agricultural equipment is also available for hire on this digital platform. Even during lockdown, thousands of packets containing seeds of cotton and vegetables were delivered to farmers through this digital platform. Atul ji and his team are working to impart technological knowhow to the farmers and also teaching them about online payment and procurement.
Friends,
Recently, one incident in Maharashtra caught my attention. There, one farmer producer company procured corn from the corn producing harvesters. This time, the company paid not just the cost of the corn but also an additional bonus with it. This was a pleasant surprise for the farmers. When the company was asked for the same, they said that under the new farm specific laws framed by Government of India, farmers are able to sell their produce in any part of the country and are getting good prices for the same. Thus, the company thought of sharing their extra profits with the farmers. The farmers had a right to it and hence the bonus was shared with them. Friends, the bonus amount may be small but this initiative is big. Through this, we come to know that on ground, the new agriculture laws are full of possibilities in favour of the farmers.
My dear countrymen,
In today’s Mann Ki Baat, I have had the opportunity to bring forth extraordinary stories of my countrymen, the country and the facets of our traditions. Our country is full of talented people. If you too know of any such individual, speak and write about them and share their accomplishments. My best wishes to you and your family for the forthcoming festivals. However, do remember and more so during the festivals – wear your masks, keep washing your hands with soap and maintain two yards of social distance. Friends, we will speak again in next month’s Mann Ki Baat.
Many Many thanks.
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar! I want to share a good news with you all at the beginning of Mann ki Baat today. Every Indian will be proud to know that a very old idol of Devi Annapurna is returning to India from Canada. This idol was stolen from a temple of Varanasi and smuggled out of the country around 100 years ago somewhere around 1913. I express my gratitude to the Government of Canada and to all those for this large heartedness who made this propitious deed possible. Mata Annapoorna has a very special relationship with Kashi. Now the coming back of her Idol is pleasing for all of us. Just like the idol of Mata Annapurna, a lot of our invaluable heritage has suffered at the hands of International gangs. These gangs sell them at a very high price in the international market. Now not only are they being subjected to heavy restrictions; India has also increased her efforts for their return. Because of such efforts, India has been successful in bringing back lots of such idols and artifacts in the past few years.There is a coincidence attached with the return of the idol of Mata Annapurna… World Heritage Week was celebrated only a few days ago. World Heritage Week provides a wonderful opportunity to the lovers of culture to revisit the past and to know about the history of these important milestones. In spite of these times of corona, this time, we saw people celebrate this Heritage week in an innovative manner. Culture helps a lot during crisis, plays a major role in handling it. Even with the help of technology, culture works like an emotional recharge. Today, lots of museums and libraries in the country are working to make their collection fully digital. In Delhi, our National museum has made some commendable efforts in this respect. National museum is working on introducing around ten virtual galleries- isn’t this interesting! Now, sitting at your home, you can tour National Museum galleries of Delhi. On the one hand it is important to take cultural heritage to the maximum number of people through the medium of technology, the use of technology is also important for the conservation of this heritage. Recently I was reading about an interesting project. There is an island named Svalbard in the north of Norway. A project,Arctic World Archive has been set upon this island. Invaluable heritage data has been stored in this archive in such a manner that no natural or man made disaster can affect it. Just recently,we have received information that the heritage of Ajanta caves is also being digitized and preserved in this project. A full view of the caves of Ajanta shall be on display in this. Along with the digitalized and restored painting, it shall also have important documents and quotes related to it. Friends, the pandemic has on the one hand changed our ways of working; on the other it has provided us with an opportunity to experience nature in a new manner. Our perspective in observing nature has also undergone a change. We are now stepping into the winter season. We will get to see myriad hues of nature. For the past few days Internet is full of viral pictures of Cherry Blossoms. You might be thinking that when I am referring to Cherry Blossoms I am talking about Japan’s distinct identity but it’s not like that. These are not pictures of Japan. These are pictures of Shillong of our Meghalaya. These cherry blossoms have further enhanced the beauty of Meghalaya.
Friends,
this twelfth of November marked the commencement of the 125th birth anniversary celebrations of Dr. Salim Ali ji. Dr. Salim has done illustrious work in the field of bird watching – the avian world. This has also attracted bird watchers of the world towards India. I have always been an ardent admirer of people who are fond of bird watching. With utmost patience, for hours together from morn to dusk, they can do bird watching, enjoying the scenic beauty of nature; they also keep passing on the knowledge gained to us. In India too, many bird watching societies are active. You too should connect yourselves with this subject. Amid the hectic routine of my life, recently in Kevadia, I alsogot a memorable opportunity to spend time with birds. Time spent among birds will bond you closer to nature, it will also inspire you towards the environment.
My dear countrymen,
India’s culture and Shaastras, knowledge has always been a centre of attraction for the entire world. Many people came to India to discover & study them & stayed back for ever, whereas some of them returned to their respective countries as carriers of this culture. I got an opportunity to know about the work of Jonas Masetti, also known as Vishwanath. Jonas teaches Vedanta & Geeta to people in Brazil. He runs an institution named Vishwavidya, situated in the hills of Petropolis, an hour’s distance from Rio De Janeiro. Jonas, after studying Mechanical Engineering worked in his stock market company. Later he was drawn towards Indian culture, especially Vedanta. From stocks to spirituality, it has truly been a long journey for him. Jonas studied Vedanta Philosophy in India, staying at Arsha Vidya Gurukulam in Coimbatore for four years. Jonas has another specialty- he is using technology to propagate his message. He regularly conducts online programmes. He also does a daily podcast. During the last seven years, through his free open courses on Vedanta, Jonas has taught over a lakh & a half students. Jonas is not only doing great work – he is doing it through a language understood by a large number of people. People are much keen on knowing how this could be of help to them during these times of Corona & quarantine. Through the medium of Mann Ki Baat, I congratulate Jonas on his efforts & wish him well for his future endeavors.
Friends,
similarly, one piece of news might have caught your attention. Newly elected MP in New Zealand Dr. Gaurav Sharma took the Oath of office in one of the ancient languages of the world – Sanskrit. The dissemination of Indian culture on part of an Indian fills us with pride. Through the medium of Mann Ki Baat, I extend best wishes to Gaurav Sharma ji. All of us wish he attains newer achievements in the service of the people of New Zealand.
My dear countrymen,
tomorrow on the 30th of November, we shall celebrate the 551st Prakash Parv, birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev ji. The world over, the influence of Guru Nanak Dev ji is distinctly visible.
From Vancouver to Wellington, from Singapore to South Africa his messages are heard all around. It is mentioned in Guru Granth Sahib –“sevak ko seva bun aayee”, that is the work of a sevak, a servant is to serve. In the past few years at many important junctures we had the opportunity to serve as a Sevak. Guru Sahib awarded us the opportunity to serve. 550th Prakash Parva of Guru Nanak Dev ji, 350th Prakash Parv of Shri Guru Govind Singh ji, next year we will have 400th Prakash Parv of Shri Guru Teg Bahadur ji too. I feel that I have been specially blessed by Guru Sahib that he has associated me very closely with his work.
Friends,
do you know that there is a Gurudwara, Lakhpat Gurudwara Sahib, in Kutch.Shri Guru Nanak ji had stayed at Lakhpat Gurudwara Sahib during his Udaasi, his spiritual travels. During the 2001 earthquake this Gurudwara too faced damage. It was the blessings of Guru Sahib that I was able to ensure its restoration. Not only was the renovation done; its glory and grandeur were restored too. All of us were bestowed with ample blessings of Guru Sahib. The restoration efforts of Lakhpat Gurudwara were honored with the Award of Distinction by the UNESCO Asia Pacific Heritage Award in 2004. The jury that gave away the award found that during the restoration, the fine details of the art and architecture were given special care. The jury also noted that in the restoration of the Gurudwara not only did the Sikh community participate actively; it was done under their guidance too. I had the good fortune of visiting Lakhpat Gurudwara when I was not even the Chief Minister. I used to feel immensely energized being there. Everyone feels blessed on visiting this Gurudwara. I feel very grateful that Guru Sahib has granted me the opportunity to serve regularly. Opening of the Kartarpur Sahib corridor in November last year was historic. I will cherish this lifelong in my heart. It is the good fortune of all of us that we got the opportunity to serve Shri Darbaar Sahib once more. It has now become easier for our Sikh brothers and sisters abroad to send contributions in the service of Darbaar Sahib. With this step, the Sangat, the followers all over the world have come closer to Darbaar Sahib.
Friends ,
it was Guru Nanak Dev ji who started the tradition of Langar and we saw how the Sikh community all over the world continued the tradition of feeding people during this period of Corona , served humanity – this tradition always keeps inspiring us. I wish we all keep working as a Sevak. May Guru Sahib keep taking services from me and countrymen in the same manner. Once again, many best wishes on Guru Nanak Jayanti.
My dear countrymen,
in the past few days I had the opportunity to interact with students of several universities across the country and be a part of important events in their journey of education. Through technology I was able to connect with students of IIT- Guwahati, IIT-Delhi, Deendayal Petroleum University of Gandhinagar, JNU of Delhi, Mysore University and Lucknow University. To be amongst the youth of the country is extremely refreshing and energizing. University campuses in a way are like Mini India. In these campuses on the one hand we see the diversity of India; on the other we also find great passion for changes for a New India. Before Corona when I used to go for a face to face event at any institution, I would urge that poor students from nearby schools to be invited to the function. Those children have been attending the functions as my special guests. When a small child in the grand function watches a young person becoming a Doctor, Engineer, Scientist, sees someone receiving a medal, new dreams awaken in the child- ‘I too can do it’, this self confidence arises. There is inspiration for resolve.
Friends,
besides this, I am always interested in knowing who the alumni of the institution are, what the arrangements by the institution for regular engagement with its alumni are,how vibrant their alumni network is.
My young friends, you are a student of an institution only till you study there, but you remain an alumni of that institution lifelong.
After leaving school or college, two things never end – one, the influence of your education, and second, your bonding with your school or college. Whenever alumni interact with each other, in their memories of school or college, greater time is given to reminiscing about time on campus and moments spent with friends than about books and studies, and, from these memories, a feeling is bornto do something for the institution.
What can bring greater happiness than to lend a hand in development of the place where your personality was moulded? I have read certain such efforts, where the former students have given back to their old institutions in great measure. Nowadays, alumni are very active in this. IITians have provided their institutions many facilities like Conference Centres, Management Centres& Incubation Centres set up by their efforts. All of these endeavors improve the learning experience of the current students. IIT Delhi has initiated an endowment fund, which is a brilliant idea. There is a culture of such endowments inrenowned universities across the world, which helps the students. I think that universities of India are also capable to institutionalize this culture.
When it comes to returning something, nothing can be deemed big or small. Even the smallest help matters. Every effort is important. Often, alumni play a very important role in technology upgradation of their institutions, in construction of buildings, in initiating awards and scholarships and in starting programs for skill development. The old student associations of certain schools have started mentorship programmes. In these programmes, they guide the students of different batches and also discuss educational prospects. Alumni associations are robust in many schools, especially in boarding schools, where they organize activities like sports tournaments and community service.
I would like to urge former students to keep consolidating their bonding with the institution in which they have studied!Whether it is at the level of school, college, or university. I also urge the institutions to work on new and innovative ways of alumni engagement and develop creative platforms so that alumni can be actively involved. A strong vibrant & active alumni network is needed not only in big Colleges and Universities but also in schools of our villages.
My dear countrymen,
the 5thDecember is the death anniversary of Sri Aurobindo. The more we read Sri Aurobindo, greater is the insight that we get. The more my young friends learn about SriAurobindo, greater will they learn about themselves, enriching themselves. The state of inner consciousness in which you are, where you are engaged in trying to achieve the many resolves, amid all this you will always find a new inspiration in Sri Aurobindo; you will find him showing you a new path!Just as at present when we are moving forward with the campaign ‘Vocal for Local’, Sri Aurobindo’s philosophy of Swadeshi shows us the path.
There is a very profound poemin Bangla.
‘Sui ChhutoPoy-Monto Ashe Tunga hote’.
Diya-ShalaiKathi, Tau aasepote ||
Pro-deeptiJaliteKhete, Shutee, Jethe.
KichhuteLokNoyaShadhiaan ||
That is, here, even the sewing needle and match stick come on a foreign ship! The people are not free even in eating, drinking, sleeping!
He also used to say that Swadeshi means that we give priority to the things made by our Indian workers and artisans. It is not that Sri Aurobindo ever opposed learning anything from abroad. Wherever there is anything new, we should learn from there and then support and encourage what can be good for our country-and that is the spirit of the Vocal for Local Mantra in the Atmanirbhar Bharat campaign. Especially what Shri Aurobindo opined about adopting Swadeshi should be read by every citizen today.
Friends,
likewise, Shri Aurobindo’s views on education were very lucid. He did not consider education to be limited only to bookish knowledge, degree and job. Sri Aurobindo used to say that our national education should focus on training of the hearts and minds of our younger generation, that is, scientific development of the mind and Indian ethos residein the heart should also be there, then only a young person can become a better citizen of the country. Whatever Shri Aurobindosaid about national education and expected then, the country is now achieving it through the new National Education Policy.
My dear countrymen,
new dimensions are being added to agriculture and its related activities in India. The agricultural reforms in the past few days have also now opened new doors of possibilities for our farmers. The demands that have been made by farmers for years, that every political party, at some point or the other made the promise to fulfill, those demands have been met. After a lot of deliberation, the Parliament of India gave a legal formto the agricultural reforms. These reforms have not only served to unshackle our farmers but also given them new rights and opportunities. In just a short span of time, these new rights have begun to ameliorate the woes of our farmers. You too should know how Jitendra Bhoiji, a farmer from Dhule district in Maharashtra made use of the recently promulgated farm laws. Jitendra Bhoiji had sown corn and decided to sell his produce to traders for a right price. The total cost of the produce was fixed at approximately Rupees Three Lakh thirty two thousand. Jitendra Bhoi even received an advance of Rupees twenty five thousand. It had been decided that the outstanding amount would be cleared in fifteen days. However, later such circumstances developed, that he did not receive the remainder of his payment. Buy the crop from the farmer, keep the payment pending for months on end ; probably this was the long standing tradition that the buyers of corn were following. This continued for four months wherein Jitendra ji was not paid his dues. In this situation, the new farm laws that were passed in September came to his aid. Under this law, it was decided that all dues of the farmers should be cleared within three days of procurement, failing which, the farmer can lodge a complaint. Another notable aspect of this law is that the area Sub Divisional Magistrate (SDM) has to ensure grievance redressal of the farmer within one month. Now, with our farmer brother empowered with this law, his grievance had to be redressed ; consequently, he lodged a complaint and within days his outstanding payments were cleared. This correct and complete knowledge of the law became the strength of Jitendra ji. Whichever the field, correct knowledge, free from misconceptions and rumors can act as a force multiplier for every individual. Mohammad Aslam ji from Baran district in Rajasthan is working in a similar fashion to increase awareness among farmers. He is also the CEO of a farmer producer organization. Yes, you heard it right! – the CEO of a farmer producer organization.I hope this is heartwarming news for the CEOs of major companies – that farmers from far flung areas of the country are now also becoming CEOs of farmer organizations! Friends, Mohammad Aslam Ji has made a Whatsapp group comprising several farmers from his area. On this group everyday he shares updates with the farmers on prevalent prices at neighboring Mandis in the area. His own FPO also buys produce from farmers, hence, this effort of his also helps farmers in taking a decision.
Friends,
awareness beget spiritedness. Shri Virendra Yadav ji is one such farmer entrepreneur, who has influenced the lives of thousands through his awareness. Sometime ago, Virendra Yadav ji used to live in Australia. Two years ago, he came to India and now lives in Kaithal, Haryana. Just like others, the stubble in the fields was a big concern for him too. Work is being done on a massive scale to find the solution to this issue, however, today in Mann Ki Baat, I am especially mentioning Virendra ji because his efforts are different and show a new way forward. To find a solution to stubble, Virendra ji bought a Straw Baler machine to make bundles of straw. For this, he also received financial assistance from the Agricultural department. With this machine, he began to make bundles of stubble. After having made the bundles, he sold the stubble to agro energy plants and paper mills. You will be amazed to know that in just two years, Virendra ji has traded in stubble in excess of Rupees Two and a Half Crores and has earned a profit of approximately Rupees Fifty Lakhs. The benefit of thisalso accrues to the farmers of those fields from where Virendra ji sources his stubble. We have often heard of ‘waste to wealth’, however, this initiative is a unique example of earning money and righteous goodwill while finding a solution to the problem of stubble. To the youth, especially the lakhs of students who are studying agriculture, it is my request that they visit villages in their vicinity and talk to the farmers and make them aware about innovations in farming and the recent agricultural reforms. This way, you will become stakeholders in major reforms underway in the country.
My dear countrymen,
in Mann Ki Baat, we refer to a wide range of issues and topics. However, it has been one year of one such incidentwe would never want to remember fondly. It has been roughly one year since the world came to know of the first case of Corona. Since then, the entire world has seen several ups and downs. Coming out of the lockdown now the discussion on a vaccine has commenced, however, any sort of negligence regarding Corona can be deadly even now. We have to firmly keep fighting against Corona.
Friends,
Baba Saheb Ambedkar’s Punya Tithi, death anniversary is in a few days from now on the 6th of December. Besides paying our homage to Baba Saheb, this day is also an occasion to reaffirm our resolve to the country and abiding by the duties, assigned to us by the Constitution as an individual. A large part of the country is also witnessing the onset of winter. Many areas are experiencing snowfall. In this weather, we must take care of the children and elders in the family, especially the ailing and take precautions ourselves too. It gives me joy to see people assisting the needy around them ; helping them with warm clothing.Winter brings many problems for destitute animals too and many people come forward to their aid. Our young generation takes active part in such initiatives. Friends, the next time when we meet in Mann Ki Baat, the year 2020 will be drawing to a close. With new hopes and faith, we will move forward. Whatever suggestions or ideas you may have now, do continue to keep sharing with me. My best wishes to all of you. May all of you stay healthy, stay active for the country.
Many Many thanks.
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. Today is the 27th of December. Just four days later, 2021 is about to usher in. In a way, today’s Mann Ki Baat is the concluding Mann Ki Baat of 2020. The next Mann Ki Baat will commence in 2021. Friends, numerous letters written by you are there in front of me. The suggestions you sent on Mygov too are there. Many have expressed themselves over the phone. Most of the messages comprise experiences of the year gone by and resolutions for 2021. Anjali from Kolhapur has written that on New year, we offer greetings and good wishes to others …let us do something novel this time! Why don’t we greet our country; send best wishes to the country too! May our country touch newer heights in 2021… May India’s image in the world strengthen further…what could be a greater wish than this!
Friends,
Abhishek from Mumbai has posted a message on NAMO App. He has written that whatever 2020 revealed to us, taught us was unthinkable. He has written, on myriad aspects of CORONA. In these letters, in these messages, one common special factor that comes across to me is something that I would like to share with you. In most of the letters people have commended the country’s capabilities and the collective strength of the countrymen.  When a novel experiment such as Janta curfew became an inspiration for the whole world, when the country felicitated our corona warriors unitedly with Taali-thali, the applause and the reverberating chime of plates…..people have sent in reminiscences of that too.
Friends,
The most common amongst the common folk of the country has felt this transformation. I have witnessed an extraordinary ripple of hope in the country.  There came multiple challenges … many a crisis. On account of Corona, the world faced numerous hurdles in terms of supply chains…But we learn a new lesson with every crisis. The country was blessed with newer capabilities. Putting it into words…this capacity is termed as “Atmanirbharta”- Self Reliance.
Friends,
The experience that Abhinav Banerjee from Delhi has written to me is very interesting too. Abhinav ji wanted to buy some toys and gifts for children in the family….hence he had gone to Jhandewalan market in Delhi.
Many of you might be aware that this market in Delhi is known for bicycles and toys. Earlier even expensive toys there would mean imported ones; cheaper toys too would come in from elsewhere too. But Abhinav ji has mentioned in his letter that many shopkeepers are selling toys to customers emphasizing on the quality, saying those are better toys since they are Made In India. Customers too are demanding India made toys. Indeed, this is it- a big transformation in the mindset… this is living proof of the same. A huge change has begun in the minds of our countrymen…that too within a year. It is not easy to gauge this change. Even economists would not be able to assess it on their parameters.
Friends,
What Venkat Murli Prasad from Vishakhapatnam has written to me also contains an idea of an entirely different kind. Venkatji has written that he is attaching for me his ABC for 2021. I could not understand what he meant by ABC. Then I saw that Venkatji has attached a chart along with the letter. I glanced at the chart and realised what he meant by ABC…Atmanirbhar Bharat Chart. This is very interesting. Venkatji has prepared a list of all those items that he uses on a daily basis. It comprises electronics, stationery, self-care items besides many other things. Venkat ji has said that knowingly or unknowingly, we are using those foreign products whose substitutes are easily available in India. He has now vowed that he would use only that product that bears the mark of our countrymen’s toil and sweat.
Friends,
But along with this, he has also referred to something which I found pretty interesting. He has written that while we are supporting a self-reliant India, there should be a clear message for our manufacturers that they should not compromise on the quality of the products. What he says is right. This is the opportune moment to work with the ethos of ‘zero effect, zero defect’. I urge manufacturers and industry leaders of the country … people of the country have taken a firm step…moving a bold step forward…vocal for local is reverberating in each and every household….in such a scenario, it is time to ensure that our products meet global standards. Whatever is global best; we should make it in India and prove it. For that, our entrepreneur friends have to come forward. Startups too have to come forth. Once again, I congratulate Venkatji on his stellar effort.
Friends,
We have to cherish this sentiment…preserve it and keep nurturing it as well. I have said this earlier too…I once again urge countrymen…do prepare a list. Whatever items we use throughout the day…. analyse them ….think of things manufactured abroad that have permeated into our lives unknowingly, in a way, shackling us down. Let us find out their substitutes made in India. and decide that henceforth we shall use products made with the hard work and sweat of the people of India. You make New Year resolutions every year…this time one has to certainly make a resolution for the sake of the country.
My dear countrymen,
In order to protect our millennia old culture, civilization and traditions from the cruel misdemeanors of tyrants & tormentors many a supreme sacrifice was made…….It is a day to remember them too. On this day the sons of Guru Gobind Singh, Sahibzade Zorawar Singh and Fateh Singh were immured alive. The tyrants wanted Sahibzade to renounce their faith; abandon the teachings of the great Guru tradition. But, our Sahibzade showed amazing courage and determination even at that tender age.  During the immurement, as stones began piling up, gradually raising the height of the wall……. Death staring into the face…..despite that, they did not budge even a bit. It was on this day itself that Guru Gobind Singhji’s mother -Mata Gujari attained martyrdom. About a week ago, it was the Martyrdom Day of Shri Guru Tegh Bahadurji too. Here in Delhi, I was blessed with the opportunity to visit Gurudwara Rakabganj to offer floral tributes and pay my obeisance to Guru Tegh Bahadurji. During this very month, inspired by Shri Guru Gobind Singhji, many people sleep on the floor. People reminisce the supreme sacrifices made by family members of   Shri Guru Gobind Singhji with immense reverence.  This martyrdom served as a new beacon of learning for entire humanity; for the country. This martyrdom served towards the great deed of protecting our civilisation. We are indebted to this martyrdom. Once again I bow to the martyrdom of Shri Guru Tegh Bahadur ji, Mata Gujari, Guru Gobind Singhji and the four Sahibzade. Several such sacrifices have preserved the present fabric of India, keeping it intact.
My dear countrymen,
I am now going to tell you something that will gladden you and make you feel proud as well. In India, between 2014 and 2018, the number of leopards has risen by more than 60 percent. In 2014, the number of leopards in the country was about 7,900, whereas in 2019 it increased to 12,852. These are the very leopards about which Jim Corbett had said: “Those who have not seen a leopard wandering free in nature, cannot imagine its beauty…. cannot visualize the beauty of its colors and the charm of its gait.” In most parts of the country, especially central India, the number of leopards has risen. Amongst the states with the maximum population of leopards Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka and Maharashtra are topmost in the order. This is a big achievement for the year. Leopards, across the world have been facing dangers; their habitat has faced loss in the entire world. In such circumstances, the continued growth of the population of leopards in India has shown a way to the entire world.  You must also be aware that in the past few years, the population of lions in India has risen; the number of tigers too has increased. Also, there has been an increase in India’s forest area, the reason for this is that not only the government but also many people, civil society, many institutions too are engaged in conserving our trees and plants and wild animals. They all deserve accolades.
Friends,
I read about a heart-touching effort at Coimbatore in Tamilnadu. You too must have seen visuals of this on social media. We have seen wheelchairs for humans, but daughter Gayatri in Coimbatore, along with her father, made a wheelchair for a suffering dog. This sensitivity is inspiring and can happen only when a person is filled with kindness and compassion towards all life forms. In Delhi NCR and other cities of the country in the chilling cold many people are doing a lot for the care of shelterless animals.  They arrange for food, water, sweaters and even beds for those animals. Some people arrange food for hundreds of such animals every day. Such efforts should be commended. Several noble efforts are being undertaken in Kaushambi, Uttar Pradesh. There prison inmates are making covers from old and torn blankets to protect cows from the cold. Besides Kaushambi, these blankets are collected from jails of other districts and then they are sewn and sent to gaushaalas, cow shelters. Prisoners of Kaushambi are sewing several covers every week. Come, let us encourage such acts of care with a sense of service to others. In fact, this is a noble act that strengthens the sensitivity of the society.
My dear countrymen,
The letter that is in front of me now bears two large photographs. These are photos of a temple and depict ‘before’ and ‘after’. The letter which is with these photos talks about a team of youth which calls itself Yuva brigade. In fact, this Youth brigade has transformed an ancient Shiva temple named Veerbhadra Swami in Srirangpatna in Karnataka. All around in the temple there were widespread weeds and shrubs…so much that even travelers could not have recognized the existence of a temple there. One day, some tourists posted a video of this forgotten temple on social media. When the Yuva brigade saw this video on social media they could not bear it and this team decided to renovate it together. They removed the thorny bushes, grass and plants that had come up in the compound of the temple. They did repair and construction wherever required. Seeing their good deed, the local people too extended a helping hand. Some offered cement; others offered paint… people came up with many other such contributions.   All these youths belong to different professions.  Hence, they took out time during weekends and worked for the temple. They arranged for electricity connection too for the temple besides getting doors installed, thus restoring the old grandeur of the temple. Passion and firm commitment are two means through which people can achieve every goal. When I see the youth of India, I feel delighted and assured. Delighted and assured because the youth of my country has the ‘Can Do’ approach and the ‘Will Do’ spirit in them. No challenge is too big for them. Nothing is out of reach for them. I read about a teacher from Tamil Nadu.  Her name is Hemalata N. K., and she teaches the oldest language of the world Tamil at a school in Viddupuram. Even the Covid 19 pandemic could not create hurdles in her teaching work. Yes! Challenges definitely were there but she found out an innovative way. She recorded all the 53 chapters of the course, created animated videos, put them in a pen drive and distributed that amongst her students. Her students got a lot of help from this; they understood the chapters visually. Along with this, she kept interacting with her students telephonically. Thus, studies became quite interesting for the students. All over the country during this corona time, the innovative methods that the teachers have adopted, the course material they have creatively prepared, is invaluable in this period of online studies. I request all the teachers to definitely upload these course materials on the Diksha Portal of the Education Ministry. This will help students who are staying in far-flung areas of the country, a lot.
Friends,
Let us now talk of Hiramanji of Korwa tribe of Jharkhand. Hiramanji lives in the Sinjo village of Garhwa district. You will be amazed to know that the population of Korwa tribe is merely 6,000, which lives in hills and forests far away from cities. Hiramanji has taken up the task of preserving the culture and identity of his community. After an untiring toil of 12 years, he has created a dictionary of the Korwa language which is getting extinct. In this dictionary, he has written with meanings many Korwa words right from words used in the household to words used in daily life. What Hiramanji has done for the Korwa community is an example for the country.
My dear countrymen,
It is said that there was a prominent courtier in the court of Akbar named AbulFazl. After a visit to Kashmir, he once remarked that the place had one such scenic view that could uplift the mood of the most irritable and bad-tempered people, making them rejoice. In fact, he was referring to the saffron fields in Kashmir. Saffron has been associated with Kashmir for centuries. Kashmiri saffron is mainly grown in places like Pulwama, Budgam and Kishtwar. In May this year, the Kashmiri Saffron was given the Geographical Indication Tag or GI tag. Through this, we want to make Kashmiri Saffron a Globally Popular Brand. Kashmiri saffron is globally famous as a spice that has many medicinal properties. It has a strong aroma, its color is deep dark and its threads are long and thick which enhances its medicinal value.
It represents the rich cultural heritage of Jammu and Kashmir. And if you’re talking about the quality, the saffron of Kashmir is unique and completely different from the saffron of other countries. Saffron from Kashmir has now got a distinct identity with the GI Tag recognition. You will be delighted to know that after obtaining the GI Tag certificate, Kashmiri Saffron was launched in a supermarket in Dubai. Now its exports will get a boost. This will further strengthen our efforts to build an Atmanirbhar Bharat. Farmers growing saffron will be especially benefited by this. Now take a look at the case of Abdul MajeedWani, a resident of Shar area of Tral in Pulwama. He is selling his GI Tagged Saffron with the help of national Saffron Mission at the Trading Center in Pampore through E-Trading. Many people like him are involved in this activity in Kashmir. Next time you decide to buy saffron, think of buying saffron from Kashmir! Only The warmth of Kashmiri people is such that it imparts a unique, distinct flavor to the saffron.
My dear countrymen,
Just two days ago was Geeta jayanti. Gita inspires us in every context of our life. But have you ever thought why is Geeta such a wonderful Granth? That is because it is the voice of Lord Krishna himself. But the uniqueness of the Gita also lies in that it begins with the quest of knowledge… starts with a question. Arjuna asked the Lord a question, inquired and only then, the world received the wisdom of Gita. Like the Gita, all the wisdom in our culture starts with inquisitiveness. The very first mantra of Vedanta is – ‘Athaato Brahm Jigyasa’, that is, come, let us inquire about Brahm. That is why we talk about the inquest of even Brahm, the ultimate creator! Such is the power of inquisitiveness. Curiosity constantly inspires you to learn something new. In childhood, we learn only because we are curious. That is, we are alive as long as there is curiosity in us. As long as there is curiosity, the process of learning something new continues. No age, no circumstance, matters at all in this. I came to know of an example of such energy of inquisitiveness, about Shri T. Srinivasacharya Swami ji, an elderly person from Tamil Nadu! Shri T Srinivasacharya Swami Ji is Ninety-Two years old. Even at this age, he is writing his book on the computer; that too, typing himself. You must be thinking that writing a book is fine…. but in the times of Srinivasacharyaji, there were no computers. So, when did he learn the computer? It is right that there was no computer during his college days. But, there still is as much curiosity in his mind and self-confidence as it was in his youth. In fact, Srinivasacharya Swamiji is a scholar of Sanskrit and Tamil. He has written about 16 spiritual books so far. However, with the advent of the computer, when he realized that the method of writing and printing books had changed, he learned the computer and necessary software at the age of 86… yes, at the age of eighty-six. Now he is completing his book.
Friends,
Shri T Srinivasacharya Swamiji’s life is a living example of the fact that life remains full of energy, as long as the curiosity in life, the desire to learn, does not die. Hence, we should never think that we lagged behind; we missed. “Only if…we too had learnt this!” We should not even think that we cannot learn, or cannot move forward.
My dear countrymen,
We were just talking about learning and doing something new out of inquisitiveness. We were also referring to new resolutions in the New Year. But there are also some people who continuously keep on doing something new, keep on fulfilling new resolves. You too must have felt in life that when we do something for society, the society itself gives us energy to do a lot of things. Significant deeds can be accomplished with seemingly simple motivations. One such youth is Shriman Pradeedp Sangwan! Gurugram’s Pradeep Sangwan has been running a campaign ‘Healing Himalayas’ since 2016. He goes to different areas in the Himalayas with his team and volunteers where they clean plastic waste dumped there by tourists. So far, Pradeep ji has cleaned tons of plastic from various tourist locations in the Himalayas. Similarly, there is a young couple from Karnataka, Anudeep and Minusha. Anudeep and Minusha got married just last month in November.  A lot of young people go for a trip after marriage, but these two did something different. Both of them always saw that people go out on a trip, but, wherever they go, they leave a lot of garbage and waste behind. A similar situation was prevailing at the Someshwar beach in Karnataka. Anudeep and Minusha decided that they would clean up the garbage that people have left behind at the Someshwar beach. This was the first resolve that both husband and wife took after marriage. Together they cleaned up a lot of garbage from the beach. Anudeep also shared about his resolve on social media.  Inspired by his magnanimous thought, a number of young people came and joined him. You will be surprised to know that together these people have cleaned more than 800 kg of waste from Someshwar beach.
Friends,
Amidst these efforts, we also have to think that this garbage gets on these beaches, these mountains in the first place? After all, it is one among us only, who leaves this garbage there. We should run a cleanliness drive like Pradeep and Anudeep-Minusha. But even before that we should also take a resolve that we will not leave garbage at all, to begin with. After all, this is also the first resolution of the Clean India campaign.  And yes, I want to remind you of something more. Due to Corona, this year it could not be discussed much. We have to make our country free from single use plastic. This is also one of the resolutions of 2021. In conclusion, I extend my best wishes to you for the New Year. Stay healthy yourself, keep your family healthy too. Next year, in January, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will touch upon new subjects.
Many thanks.
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. When I express Mann Ki Baat, it feels like I am present amongst you as a member of your family. Little matters exchanged that teach one another; bitter- sweet life experiences that become an inspiration for living a wholesome life…and this is just what Mann Ki Baat is! Today is the last day of January 2021. Are you too thinking, the way I am that 2021 had commenced just a few days ago? It just doesn’t feel that the entire month of January has passed by! This is what is termed as the speed of time. It feels like just a matter of a few days ago when we were exchanging good wishes with each other! Then we celebrated Lohri, Makar Sankranti, Pongal and Bihu. It was festival time in different parts of the country. We celebrated the 23rd of January, the birth anniversary of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose as PARAKRAM DIWAS and also watched the grand Republic Day Parade on the 26th of January. Following the Address to the joint session by Rashtrapati ji, the Budget Session has also begun. Amidst all of this, there was one more happening that is keenly awaited by all of us – that is the announcement of the Padma Awards. The nation honored people doing extraordinary work; for their achievements and contribution to humanity. This year too, the recipients comprise people who have done excellent work in myriad fields; through their endeavour, they’ve changed someone’s life, taking the country forward. Thus, the tradition of conferring the Padma honour on unsung heroes that was started a few years ago has been maintained this time too. I urge all of you to know more about these people and their contribution…discuss it amongst the family. You will see how this inspires everyone!
This month, there has been very good news from the cricket pitch too. Our cricket team, after initial setbacks made a grand comeback, winning the series in Australia. The hard work and teamwork of our players is inspirational. Amidst all this, the country was saddened by the insult to the Tricolor on the 26th of January in Delhi. We have to infuse times to come with new hope and novelty. Last year, we displayed exemplary patience and courage. This year too, we have to work hard to attain our resolves. We have to take our country forward at a faster pace.
My dear countrymen,
the beginning of this year marks the completion of almost one year of our battle against Corona. Just as India’s fight against Corona became an example, our vaccination Programme too is turning out to be exemplary to the world. Today, India is undertaking the world’s biggest Covid Vaccine Programme. Do you know what’s a matter of more pride? Along with the biggest Vaccine Programme, we are vaccinating our citizens faster than anywhere in the world. In just 15 days, India has vaccinated over 30 lakh Corona Warriors, whereas an advanced country such as America took 18 days to get the same done; Britain 36 days!
Friends,
today, the Made in India vaccine is, of course, a symbol of India’s self-reliance; it is also a symbol of her self-pride. On NamoApp, Bhai Himanshu Yadav from UP has written that the Made in India vaccine has generated a new self confidence within. Kirti ji writes from Madurai that many of her foreign friends are messaging her thanking India. Kirti ji’s friends have written to her that the way India has helped the world in the fight against Corona has enhanced the respect for India in their hearts. Kirti ji, listening to these notes of glory for the country also fills the listeners of Mann Ki Baat with a sense of pride. These days, I too receive similar messages for India from Presidents and Prime Ministers of different countries of the world. You must also have seen recently how the President of Brazil, in a tweet thanked India – every Indian was gladdened at that. People residing thousands of kilometers away in remote corners of the world are deeply aware of that context in Ramayan; they are intensely influenced by it. This is a speciality of our culture.
Friends,
in this vaccination Programme, you must have noticed something more! During the moment of crisis, India is able to serve the world today, since she is capable, self-reliant in the field of medicines, vaccines. The same thought underpins the Atmanirbhar Bharat Campaign. The more India is capable, the more will she serve humanity; correspondingly the world will benefit more!
My dear countrymen,
every time, lots of your letters are received; one gets to know about your thoughts through your messages on Namo App and MyGov and phone calls. One amongst these messages caught my attention – this is from sister Priyanka Pandey ji. 23 year old Beti Priyanka ji is a student of Hindi literature and resides at Siwan in Bihar. Priyanka ji has written on Namo App that she was highly inspired by my suggestion of visiting 15 domestic tourist places in the country and hence on the 1st of January, she started for a destination which was very special. The place was 15 kilometers away from her home – it was the ancestral residence of the country’s first President Dr Rajendra Prasad ji. Priyanka ji has beautifully mentioned that this was her first step in the realm of acquainting herself with the country’s great luminaries. There, Priyanka ji came across many books written by Dr Rajendra Prasad and many historical photographs as well. Really Priyanka ji, this experience of yours will inspire others too.
Friends,
this year, India is going to commence the celebration of 75 years of her Independence – Amrit Mahotsav. In this context, this is an excellent time to explore places associated with those heroes on account of whom we attained Freedom.
Friends,
as we refer to the Freedom Movement and Bihar, I would like to touch upon another comment made on Namo App. Jai Ram Viplava, a resident of Munger has written to me about the Tarapur Martyr day. On 15th of February 1932, the Britishers had mercilessly killed several of a group of brave young patriots. Their only crime was that they were raising the slogan of ‘Vande Matram’ and ‘Bharat Mata Ki Jai’.I bow to those martyrs and remember their courage with reverence. I want to thank Jai Ram Viplava ji. He has brought to the notice of the country an incident about which not as much discussion happened as should have been done.
My dear countrymen,
the freedom struggle was fought with full might in every part, every city, every town and village of India. In every corner of this land, Bharatbhoomi, great sons and brave daughters were born who gave up their lives for the nation. Hence it is very important that we preserve the saga of their struggles for our sake and their memories and for this we can write about them to keep their memories alive for generations to come. I appeal to all countrymen, especially the young friends to write about freedom fighters, incidents associated with freedom. Write books about the saga of valour during the period of freedom struggle in your area. Now, as India will celebrate 75 years of her freedom, your writings will be the best tribute to those heroes of our freedom. An initiative has been taken for Young Writers for the purpose of India Seventy-Five. This will encourage young writers of all states and of all languages. Writers who write on such subjects, who have studied deeply Indian heritage and culture, will come forth in large numbers in the country. We have to fully help such emerging talents. This will also prepare a category of thought leaders that will decide the course of the future. I invite my young friends to be a part of this initiative and to use their literary skills more and more. Information about this can be accessed from the website of the Ministry of Education.
My dear countrymen,
what the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ like, only you know better. But for me the best thing that I like in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that I get to learn and read a lot. In a way, indirectly, I get an opportunity to connect with you all. Someone’s effort, somebody’s zeal, someone’s passion to achieve something for the country – all this inspires me a lot, fills me with energy.
I felt very happy on reading about how a local vegetable market in Boinpalli of Hyderabad is fulfilling its responsibility. All of us have seen that in vegetable markets, a lot of produce gets spoilt for a variety of reasons. The vegetables spread all around, it spreads filth too, but the vegetable market of Boinpalli decided that it will not throw away the leftover vegetables just like that. People associated with the vegetable market decided that they will generate electricity from this. You may have hardly heard of generating electricity from waste vegetables – this is the power of innovation. Today in Boinpalli vegetable market what was once a waste, wealth is getting created from that – this is the journey of creation of wealth from waste. Nearly 10-tonnes of waste is generated there every day, which is collected in a plant. In this plant 500-units of electricity is generated every day, and about 30 Kilos of bio fuel too is generated. The vegetable market is illuminated through this electricity and the bio fuel that is generated is used to cook food in the market canteen – isn’t it a wonderful effort!
A similar amazing feat has been achieved by the Badaut village Panchayat of Panchkula in Haryana. This Panchayat faced the problem of water drainage. Because of this dirty water was spilling around, spreading disease, but, people of Badaut decided that they would create wealth even from this water waste. The village Panchayat started filtering the dirty water coming from the village after collecting it at a place, and this filtered water is now being used for irrigation by the farmers of the village, thereby, liberating them from pollution, filth and disease and irrigating the fields too.
Friends,
an example of how protection of environment can open avenues of income was seen in Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh too. For centuries a type of paper called ‘Mon Shugu’ is made in this hilly region of Arunachal Pradesh. The locals here make this paper from the bark of a plant named Shugu Sheng, hence trees do not have to be cut to make this paper. Besides, no chemical is used in making this paper, thus, this paper is safe for the environment and for health too. There was a time when this paper was exported but with modern techniques, large amount of paper started getting made and this local art was pushed to the brink of closure. Now a local social worker Gombu has made an effort to rejuvenate this art, this is also giving employment to tribal brothers and sisters there.
I have seen another news from Kerala that makes us realise our responsibilities. In Kottayam of Kerala there is an elderly divyang, N.S Rajappan Sahab. Due to paralysis, Rajappan is incapable of walking, but this has not affected his commitment to cleanliness. For the past several years he has been going by boat in Vembanad lake and taking out the plastic bottles thrown into the lake. Think, how great Rajappan ji’s thought is! Taking inspiration from Rajappan ji, we too should, wherever possible, make our contribution to cleanliness.
My dear countrymen,
you must have witnessed a few days ago, that four women pilots from India took command of a non-stop flight from San Francisco, America to Bangalore. Travelling more than ten thousand kilometres, this flight ferried more than two hundred and fifty passengers to India. You must have also observed this time in the 26th January parade, where two women officers of the Indian Air Force created new history. Whatever be the area, the participation of the women of the country is continuously on the rise, but, often we see that, there is not much discussion of similar changes occurring in the villages of the country, so, when I got this news from Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh, I felt that I must make a mention of it in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
This news is very inspiring. In Chichgaon, Jabalpur, some tribal women were working on daily wages in a rice mill. Just like the Corona pandemic affected every person in the world, these women were also affected. Work stopped in their rice mill. Naturally, their income got affected as well but they did not get disheartened; they did not give up. They decided that collectively they would start their own rice mill. The mill where they worked wanted to sell its machine too. One among these women, Meena Rahangadale ji formed a ‘Self Help Group’ by associating all the women, and all of them raised capital from their savings. Whatever amount of money was short, was sourced under the aegis of Ajivika mission in the form of a loan from the bank, and, now see, these tribal sisters bought the same rice mill in which they once worked! Today they are running their own rice mill. Within this very period, this mill has also earned a profit of about three lakh rupees. With this profit, Meena ji, and her colleagues, are arranging to repay the bank loan and then seeking avenues to expand their business. Such amazing efforts have taken place in every corner of the country to counter whatever circumstances Corona created.
My dear countrymen,
if I mention Bundelkhand to you, what are the things that will come to your mind? Those interested in history will connect this area with Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi. At the same time, some people will think of beautiful and serene Orchha. And some people will also remember the extreme heat conditions of this region, but, these days something different is happening here which is quite heartening, and about which, we must know. Recently, a month long ‘Strawberry Festival’ began in Jhansi.Everyone is surprised – Strawberry and Bundelkhand! But, this is the truth. Now, there is growing enthusiasm about the cultivation of Strawberry in Bundelkhand, and one of Jhansi’s daughters – Gurleen Chawla has played a huge role in it! A Law student Gurleen carried out Strawberry cultivation successfully first at her home and then in her farm raising the hope that this was possible in Jhansi too. Jhansi’s Strawberry festival emphasizes the ‘Stay at Home’ concept. Through this festival, farmers and youth are being encouraged to do gardening and grow strawberries in the vacant spaces behind their home, or in the Terrace Garden. With the help of new technology, similar efforts are also being done in other parts of the country, Strawberry which was once identified with the hills, is now also being cultivated in the sandy soil of Kutch, boosting the income of farmers.
Friends,
experiments like the Strawberry Festival not only demonstrate the spirit of Innovation ; they also demonstrate the manner in which the agricultural sector of our country is adopting new technologies. Friends, the government is committed to modernizing agriculture and is also taking many steps in that direction. The efforts of the Government shall also continue in future.
My dear countrymen,
just a few days ago I watched a video. That video was of Sarmuddin, a painter from Naya Pingla village in West Midnapore, West Bengal. He was expressing happiness that his painting based on Ramayana had sold for two lakh rupees. This brought great happiness to his fellow villagers too. After watching this video, I was curious to know more about it. In this very context, I came to know about a very good initiative related to West Bengal, which, I would definitely like to share with you.
The regional office of the Ministry of Tourism started an ‘Incredible India Weekend Getaway’ in the villages of Bengal at the beginning of the month. The Handicraft artisans from West Midnapore, Bankura, Birbhum, Purulia, East Bardhaman, organized handicraft workshop for visitors. I was also told that the total sales of handicrafts during the Incredible India Weekend Getaways is very encouraging to the handicraft artisans. People are also making our art forms popular employing novel methods across the country.
Look at Bhagyashree Sahu of Rourkela, Odisha. Although she is a student of Engineering, in the past few months, she started learning the art of Pattchitra and has mastered it. But, did you know where she began painting – Soft Stones, on Soft Stones. On her way to college, Bhagyashree found these Soft Stones, she collected and cleaned them. Later, she painted these stones in Pattachitra style for two hours every day. After painting these stones, she started gifting them to her friends. During the lockdown, she started painting on bottles too. And now, she even conducts workshops on this art form. A few days ago, on the birth anniversary of Subhash Babu, Bhagyashree paid him a unique tribute done on stone. I wish her all the best for her future endeavours. A lot new can be learnt and done through Art and Colours.
I was informed of a similar novel initiative being carried out in Dumka, Jharkhand. A principal of a middle school there, in order to teach and help the children learn, got the village walls painted with the letters of the English and Hindi alphabets ; alongside various pictures have also been painted which are helping the village children a lot. I extend my greetings to all such individuals who are involved in such initiatives.
My dear countrymen,
thousands of kilometers from India, across many oceans and continents, lies a country – Chile. It takes a lot of time to reach Chile from India. However, the fragrance of Indian culture has been there for a long time. Another significant aspect is that Yoga is extremely popular there. You will be pleased to know that there are more than 30 Yoga schools in Santiago, the capital of Chile. The International Day of Yoga is also celebrated with great fervor in Chile. I have been told that the House of Deputies is full of ardent enthusiasm for the Yoga Day. In these times of Corona, with a stress on immunity and ways to strengthen it, through the power of Yoga, now they are attaching much more importance to Yoga. The Chilean Congress, that is their Parliament, has passed a proposal. There, the 4th of November has been declared as National Yoga Day. Now, you would be wondering, what is so special about 4th of November! On 4th of November 1962, the first Yoga institution in Chile was established by José Rafael Estrada. By proclaiming this day as National Yoga Day, a tribute has been paid to Estrada ji. This is a special honour by the Chilean Parliament, which every Indian takes pride in. By the way, there is another aspect about the Chilean Parliament, one which will interest you. The name of the Vice President of the Chilean Senate is Rabindranath Quinteros. He has been so named, inspired by Vishwa Kavi Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore.
My dear countrymen,
I have been requested by Dr. Swapnil Mantri from Jalna,Maharashtra and Prahlad Rajgopalan from Palakkad, Kerala on MyGov to speak on ‘Road safety’ in Mann Ki Baat. This very month, from the 18th of January to the 17th of February, our country is observing Road Safety month. Road accidents are a matter of concern not just in our country but also the world over. Today, in India, many efforts are being made for road safety at the individual and collective level along with the Government. We should all become active stakeholders in these efforts to save lives.
Friends,
you must have noticed, passing through the roads that the Border Road Organization builds, one gets to see many innovative slogans. Slogans such as ‘This is highway not runway’ or ‘Be Mr. Late than Late Mr.’ are quite effective in promoting awareness about being careful on the roads. Now you can also send such innovative slogans or catch phrases on MyGov. Good slogans from you too will be used in this campaign.
Friends,
whilst speaking about Road safety, I would like to mention a post received on NaMo app from Aparna Das ji of Kolkata. Aparna ji has asked me to speak on the ‘FASTag programme’. She says that the experience of travel has changed with ‘FASTag’. This saves not just travel time ; problems like stopping at Toll Plaza, worrying about cash payment are also over. Aparna ji is right too! Earlier, a vehicle used to take on an average 7 to 8 minutes to cross our toll plazas. However, since the emergence of ‘FASTag’, this time has reduced to around one and a half minutes to 2 minutes on an average. Due to this reduced waiting time at the Toll plaza, fuel too is being saved. It is estimated that this will save approximately 21 thousand crore Rupees of our countrymen. That is saving money as well as time. I urge all of you to follow all the guidelines, take care of yourself and also save the lives of others.
Friends,
it is said here- “जलबिंदु निपातेन क्रमशः पूर्यते घटः”, meaning that drop by drop, the pot gets filled. Every single effort of ours leads to the realization of our resolve. Therefore, the goals with which we started in 2021, we all have to fulfill them together. Come, let us all work together to make this year meaningful. Do keep sending your messages, your ideas. We will meet again next month.
Iti Vidaa punarmilanaay.
इति-विदा पुनर्मिलनाय !
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. Yesterday was the festival of Magh Poornima. The month of Magh is regarded related especially to rivers, lakes and water sources. It has been mentioned in our scriptures: MAGHE NIMAGNAAHA SALILE SUSHITE, VIMUKTAPAAPAAHA TRIDIVAM PRAYAANTI – meaning, in the month of Magh, a bath in any holy water body is considered sacred. In every society of the world, invariably, there is one tradition or the other with respect to a river. Many civilizations have evolved along the banks of rivers. Since our culture is thousands of years old, the spread of this phenomenon is more evident here. There must not be a single day in India, when there is no festival connected with water in some corner of the country or the other. During the period of Magh, people even leave their homes, near and dear ones, comforts and amenities to perform KALPVAAS on the banks of rivers. This time, in Haridwar, KUMBH too is being held. For us, water is life; faith too and the flow of development as well. In a way, water is more important than PARAS, the philosopher’s stone. It is said that with the touch of a PARAS, iron gets turned into gold. Similarly, the touch of water is necessary for life; imperative for development.
Friends,
possibly there is another reason to associate the month of Magh with water – after this, winters come to an end and summers start knocking. Hence, for the conservation of water, we should begin efforts right away. A few days later, just on the 22nd of the month of March, it’s World Water Day.
Aaradhya from U.P. has written to me that millions of people in the world spend a major part of their lives in overcoming water shortage. It has not been said without reason, ‘BIN PAANI SAB SOON’ – without water, everything comes to a naught! In order to solve the water crisis, Sujit ji of North Dinajpur has sent me a very nice message. Sujit ji has written that Nature has bestowed upon us a collective gift in the form of Water; hence the responsibility of saving it is also collective. It is correct that just as there is a collective gift, there is a collective accountability too. Sujit ji’s thought is absolutely correct. River, lake, pond or ground water – all of these are for everyone.
Friends,
there was a time when in villages, people would collectively look after wells and ponds. Now one such effort is underway at Thiruvannamalai, Tamilnadu. Here, local people have been running a campaign for the conservation of their wells. These people are rejuvenating public wells in their vicinity that had been lying unused for years.
The endeavour of Babita Rajput ji of village Agrotha in Madhya Pradesh will inspire all of you. Babita ji’s village is in Bundelkhand. Close to her village, once there was a very large lake which had dried up. She mobilized other women of the village itself and built a canal to bring water to the lake. Through this canal, rainwater started flowing directly into the lake. Now this lake remains filled with water.
Friends,
the work of Jagdish Kuniyal ji, resident of Bageshwar, Uttarakhand also teaches us a lot. Jagdish ji’s village and the adjoining area were dependent on a natural source for their water requirements. But many years ago, the source dried up. This led to worsening of the water crisis in the entire area. Jagdish ji decided to solve the crisis through tree plantation. Along with fellow villagers, he planted thousands of trees over the entire area…and today, the dried up water source at the place is filled to the brim once again.
Friends,
similarly, we shall have to understand our collective responsibilities with regard to water. In most parts of India, rainfall begins in May-June. Can we right away start a 100 day campaign for the sake of cleaning up water sources around us and conserving rainwater? With this very thought in mind, in a few days from now, Jal Shakti Abhiyan CATCH THE RAIN is being initiated by the Jal Shakti Ministry. Its credo is ‘CATCH THE RAIN, WHERE IT FALLS, WHEN IT FALLS’. We shall commit ourselves to the task right now…we shall get existing rain water harvesting systems repaired, clean up lakes and ponds in villages, remove impediments in the way of water flowing into water sources; thus we shall be able to conserve rainwater to the maximum.
My dear countrymen,
whenever a discussion on the month of Magh and its spiritual-social significance takes place, the discourse is never complete without one name – the name is that of Sant Ravidas ji. Sant Ravidas ji’s birth anniversary falls on the very day of Magh Poornima. Even today, the words, the knowledge of Sant Ravidas ji guide us on our path. He’d said:
EKAI MAATI KE SABH BHAANDE, SABH KA EKAU SIRJANHAAR | RAVIDAS VYAAPAI EKAI GHAT BHEETAR, SABH KAU EKAY GHADAI KUMHAR ||
All of us are earthen vessels of one clay; all of us have been coiled and shaped by the One. Sant Ravidas ji always expressed himself openly on the social ills that had pervaded society. He laid bare social evils in front of society, showed the path of redemption; and that’s why Meera ji had said, ‘GURU MILIYA RAIDAS, DEENHI GYAAN KI GUTKI’ |
It’s my good fortune that I am connected with Varanasi, the birth place of Sant Ravidas ji. I have experienced the spiritual loftiness of Sant Ravidas ji’s life and his energy at the pilgrimage site. Friends, Ravidas ji used to say
‘KARAM BANDHAN MEIN BANDH RAHIYO, PHAL KI NA TAJJIYO AAS | KARMA MAANUSH KA DHARMA HAI, SAT BHAAKHAI RAVIDAS ||
Meaning, we should incessantly strive with our Karma, our work; the Phal, the reward is bound to come your way. This means – Karma leads to Siddhi, attainment with certitude. Our youth must learn one more thing from Sant Ravidas ji. For doing any work, they should not bind themselves to old methods and practices. Decide and shape your life yourself. Devise your own methods and practices, set your goals yourselves. If your conscience and self confidence is unshakeable, you need not fear anything in the world.
I say so since often due to pressures of traditional thinking our youth are not able to do what they really like. That is why you should never hesitate in thinking new, doing new. In the same manner Sant Ravidas ji has given another important message. This message is ‘to stand on one’s own feet’. It is not fair at all that we remain dependant on others for our dreams. Things remaining to continue the way they are… Ravidas ji was never in favour of this. Today, we see that the youth of the country too is not at all in favour of this thinking. Today when I see the innovative spirit of the youth of the country, I feel Ravidas ji too would have definitely felt proud of our youth.
My dear countrymen,
today happens to be the ‘National Science Day’ too. The day is dedicated to the discovery of ‘Raman Effect’ by the great scientist of India, Dr C. V. Raman. Yogeshwaran ji from Kerala has written on NamoApp that the discovery of Raman Effect had changed the direction of science in its entirety. Snehil ji from Nasik too has sent me a very good message connected with this. Snehil ji has written that there are many scientists from our country without whose contribution science would not have progressed as much. The way we know of other scientists of the world, in the same way we should also know about the scientists of India. I too agree with this view of these listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I definitely would want that our youth know, understand and read a lot about the history of science of India ; about our scientists as well.
Friends,
when we talk of science then many a time people restrict it to physics-chemistry or labs, but the spread of science is much more than that. And there is a lot of contribution of the power of science in the ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Campaign’. We have to move science forward with the mantra of ‘Lab to Land’.
Chintala Venkat Reddy ji from Hyderabad is an example. A doctor friend of Reddy ji once told him about the diseases caused by deficiency of vitamin D and the dangers thereof. Reddy ji is a farmer, he thought about what he could do about solving this problem. After this he worked a lot and developed breeds of wheat and rice that specially contained vitamin D. This month itself he has received patent from World Intellectual Property Organization, Geneva. Our Government is fortunate that Venkat Reddy was also honoured with the Padmashree last year.
Similarly, Urugen Futsog of Ladakh too is working very innovatively. At those heights Urugen is growing about 20 crops organically, that too in a cyclic way, that is, he utilises the waste of one crop as manure for the other crop. Isnt’ it amazing?
In the same way Kamraj Bhai Choudhary from Patan district in Gujarat has developed good seeds of drum stick at home itself. Some people call drum stick as Sargava or Moringa. Drum sticks that are grown with the help of good seeds are of good quality too. Now by sending his produce to Tamil Nadu and West Bengal he is raising his income also.
Friends,
nowadays you must be hearing a lot, the name of Chia seeds. People connected to health awareness give a lot of importance to it and it has a lot of demand too in the world. In India, it is mostly sourced from abroad but now people are taking up the challenge to be self-reliant in Chia seeds too. Similarly, Harishchandra ji of Barabanki in UP has begun farming of Chia seeds. Cultivation of Chia seeds will also increase his income and will help in the self-reliant India campaign too.
Friends,
many experiments of creating wealth from agricultural waste too are being run successfully in the entire country. Like, Murugesan ji from Madurai made a machine to make ropes from waste of banana. This innovation of Murugesan ji will solve the issues of environment and filth too, and will also pave the way for additional income for the farmers.
Friends,
the purpose of talking about so many people to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that we all should get motivated by them. When every citizen of the country will spread the spirit of science in his life and in every field, avenues of progress will also open up and the country will become self-reliant too. And I do believe that every citizen of the country can do this.
My dear friends,
Ranjan ji from Kolkata, in his letter, has raised a very interesting and fundamental question and along with that, has tried to answer it in the best way. He asks what it means to us when we talk of becoming self-reliant. In answer to this very question, he himself further writes that- “’Self reliant India” is not just a Government policy, but is a national spirit. He believes that being self-reliant means deciding one’s own fate, that is controlling one’s own destiny. Ranjan babu is a hundred percent correct. Furthering what he has said, I too would say that the first condition for self-reliance is to have pride in the things of one’s own country; to take pride in the things made by people of one’s own country. When every countryman takes pride, every countryman connects; self-reliant India doesn’t remain just an economic campaign but becomes a national spirit. When we see fighter plane Tejas made in our own country doing acrobatics in the sky, when Made in India tanks, Made in India missiles increase our pride, when we see Made in India coaches in Metro trains in wealthy-advanced nations, when we see Made in India Corona Vaccines reaching dozens of countries, then our heads rise higher. And it is not that only bigger things will make India self-reliant. Textiles made in India, handicraft goods made by talented artisans of India, electronic appliances of India, mobiles of India, in every field we have to raise this pride. When we move forward with this thought, only then will we become self-reliant in the truest sense… and friends, I am happy that this mantra of self-reliant India is reaching the villages of the country. This very thing happened in Bettiah, about which I got to read in the media.
A resident of Bettiah, Pramod ji worked as a technician in an LED bulb manufacturing factory in Delhi. During his work in the factory, he understood the intricacies of the entire process in great detail. But during corona Pramod ji had to return to his home. Do you know what Pramod ji did after returning? He himself started a small unit to manufacture LED bulbs. He brought along some youngsters from his area and completed the journey from being a factory worker to becoming a factory owner in a few months ; that too while living in his own house.
There is one more example from Garhmukteshwar in UP. Shriman Santosh Ji from Garhmukteshwar, has written how during the Corona outbreak he turned adversity into opportunity. Santosh ji’s ancestors were craftsmen par excellence ; they used to make mats. When everything came to a halt at the time of Corona, these people began mat making with great energy and enthusiasm. Soon, they started getting orders for their mats not only from Uttar Pradesh, but also from other states. Santosh ji also narrated that with this the hundreds of years old beautiful art of this region has received a new strength.
Friends,
there are many examples across the country where people are contributing in a similar manner to the ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan’. Today it has become a sentiment, flowing in the hearts of common folk.
My dear countrymen,
I saw an interesting post by Mayur, a resident of Gurgaon, on the NaMo App. He is a passionate bird watcher and a nature lover. Mayur ji has written that while he lives in Haryana, he wishes us to touch upon the people of Assam, and in particular, the people of Kaziranga. I thought that Mayur ji would talk about the Rhino, hailed as the pride of Kaziranga. But Mayur ji instead has asked for appreciation of the people of Assam for the rise in the number of Waterfowls in Kaziranga. I was searching for a common term to describe Waterfowls in simple terminology, and found the word – Jalpakshi – Birds that nest not on the trees but on the water, such as ducks and others.
The Kaziranga National Park & ​​Tiger Reserve Authority has been carrying out its Annual Waterfowls Census for some time. This Census reveals the population of water birds and also about their favorite Habitat. Just two-three weeks ago, the survey was conducted again. You will also be delighted to know that this time the number of water birds has increased by about one hundred seventy five (175%) percent compared to last year. A total of 112 Species of Birds have been sighted in Kaziranga National Park during this Census. And of these, 58 species happen to be winter migrants from different parts of the world including Europe, Central Asia and East Asia. The most important reason for this is that here, there is better water conservation along with very little human interference. However, in some cases, positive human interference is also very important.
Just take the example of Shri Jadav Payeng of Assam with whom some of you certainly must be familiar. He has received the Padma award for his work. Shri Jadav Payeng is the person who actively contributed in raising about 300 hectares of plantations in the Majuli Island in Assam. He has been constantly working for forest conservation and is also involved in motivating people for Plantation and conservation of biodiversity.
Friends,
our temples in Assam are also playing a unique role in the protection of nature. If you take a look at our temples, you will find that every temple has a pond in the vicinity. The Hayagriva Madheb Temple at Hajo, the Nagashankar Temple at Sonitpur and the Ugratara Temple at Guwahati have many such ponds nearby. They are being used to save near extinct species of turtles. Assam is home to the highest number of species of turtles. The ponds of theses temples can become excellent sites for their conservation and breeding and training about them.
My dear countrymen,
some people think that it is necessary to be a scientist to do innovation and some believe that it is essential to be a teacher to teach something to others. Those who challenge this line of thinking are worthy of praise. Now for example if anyone trains someone to become a soldier, is it necessary for him to be a soldier? You may be thinking that yes, it is necessary. But here is a little twist!
On MyGov app, Kamalakant ji has shared a media report which states something different. There is a gentleman in Arakhuda in Odisha – Nayak Sir. Although his name is Silu Nayak, everyone addresses him as Nayak Sir. In reality he is a man on a mission! He imparts free training to the youth who want to join the army. The name of the organization of Nayak Sir is Mahaguru Battalion. The training touches upon all the aspects from physical fitness to interviews and writing to training. You will be surprised to know that the people this organization has trained, have secured their places in uniformed forces such as the Army, Navy, Air Force, CRPF and BSF.
By the way, you will also be amazed to know that Silu Nayak ji had himself tried to get recruited in Odisha Police but could not succeed. Despite this, on the basis of his own training, he has made many youth worthy of national service. Come, let us all wish Nayak Sir greater success for preparing more heroes for our country.
Friends, sometimes even a very small and simple question rankles the mind. These questions are not very long ; they are very simple, yet they make us think. A few days ago Aparna Reddy ji of Hyderabad asked me one such question. She said “You have been PM for so many years and were CM for so many years. Do you ever feel that something is missing?” Aparna ji’s question seems simple but is equally difficult. I pondered this over and told myself that one of my shortcomings was that I could not make much effort to learn Tamil, the oldest language in the world ; I could not make myself learn Tamil! It is such a beautiful language, which is popular all over the world. Many people have told me a lot about the quality of Tamil literature and the depth of the poems written in it. India is a land of many languages, which symbolizes our culture and pride. Speaking of language, I want to share a small, interesting clip with you.
(SOUND CLIP STATUE OF UNITY)
Actually, what you were listening to now is a guide at the Statue of Unity, informing people in Sanskrit about the tallest statue of Sardar Patel in the world. You will be happy to know that there are more than 15 guides in Kevadiya, who guide people in fluent Sanskrit. Now I present to you one more voice –
(SOUND CLIP CRICKET COMMENTARY)
You too would have been surprised to hear this. Actually, this is a cricket commentary being done in Sanskrit. In Varanasi, a cricket tournament is held among Sanskrit colleges. These colleges are – Shastharth College, Swami Vedanti Ved Vidyapeeth, Sri Brahma Veda Vidyalaya and International Chandramouli Charitable Trust. Commentary is also done in Sanskrit during the matches of this tournament. I just played for you a very small part of that commentary. Not only this, in this tournament, players and commentators are seen in the traditional attire. If you want energy, excitement, suspense all at once, then you should listen to the sports commentaries. Long before the advent of TV, sports commentary was the medium through which people of the country felt the thrill of sports like cricket and hockey. The commentary for tennis and football matches is also very well presented. We have seen that games in which commentaries are vibrant, they get promoted and gain popularity very fast. Here too, we have many Indian sports, where commentary culture has not permeated yet and due to this they are in a state of near extinction. I have a thought – Why not have good commentaries of different sports and especially Indian sports in more and more languages, we must think about encouraging it. I would urge the Sports Ministry and private institutional partners to think about it.
My dear young friends,
the coming few months are of special importance in the lives of all of you. Most of the young friends will have exams. Do all of you remember – You have to become a warrior not a worrier, go gleefully for the examination and come back with a smile. You have to compete with yourself, not with anyone else. Get adequate sleep and be mindful of time management. Do not stop playing, for those who play are the ones that blossom. Revision and smart methods of memorization are to be adopted, that is, overall, in these exams, you have to bring out your best. You must be thinking how all this will be possible. We’re going to do it together. Like every year, this year too we will have ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’. But before the ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ to be held in March, I request all of you exam warriors, parents and teachers to share your experiences, your tips. You can share on MyGov platform and Narendra Modi app. This time, along with the youth, parents and teachers are also invited to ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’. You will get all the information on MyGov – how to participate, how to win the prize, how to get an opportunity to discuss with me. So far, more than one lakh students, about 40 thousand parents, and about 10 thousand teachers have participated. You too participate today itself. In the times of Corona, I took out some time, added many new mantras in the exam warrior book; some for the parents as well. A lot of interesting activities related to these mantras are given on the Narendra Modi App which will help to ignite the exam warrior in you. Do try them. Best wishes to all my young friends for the upcoming exams.
My dear countrymen, the month of March is also the last month of our financial year, therefore, it will be a very busy period for many of you. The way economic activities are intensifying in the country, the activities of our business and entrepreneur friends are also increasing. In the midst of all these, we should not lower our guard against Corona. May all of you be healthy, be happy, stay steadfast on the path of duty and service and the country will continue to move ahead fast. Best wishes in advance to all of you for the festivals; there should not be any laxity in the rules regarding Corona as well.
Many many thanks.
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. Today, I am expressing Mann Ki Baat at a time when Corona is testing our patience; it is testing the limits of all of us at enduring misery. Many of our near and dear ones have left us untimely. After successfully confronting the first wave of Corona, the country was full of enthusiasm, full of self-confidence, but this storm has shaken the country.
Friends,
in the days gone by, to tide over this crisis, I had long deliberations with experts from myriad sectors. People from our Pharma industry, vaccine manufacturers, those connected with oxygen production, experts from the medical field have put forth their valuable suggestions to the government. This time, for emerging victorious in this battle, we have to accord priority to expert and scientific advice. The Government of India is applying its entire might to give a fillip to the endeavours of State Governments. The State Governments too are trying their best to fulfill their responsibilities.
Friends,
presently, the country’s doctors and health workers are waging a colossal battle against Corona. Over the past one year, they have undergone varied experiences. Joining us, at the moment, is the well known Dr Shashank Joshi ji from Mumbai.
Dr Shashank ji has immense grassroot level experience in the field of treatment of Corona and allied research. He has also been the Dean of the Indian College of Physicians. Let’s speak to Dr Shashank.
PM – Namaskar Dr Shashank ji
Dr Shashank – Namaskar Sir
PM – Just recently had got an opportunity to speak to you. I had liked the clarity in your thoughts. I felt all citizens of the country should know about your thoughts. From what we used to hear, I present it before you in the form of a question. Dr Shashank, all of you are deeply involved at the moment in saving lives, day and night…first of all, I’d like you to tell people about the Second Wave; how different it is medically, what precautions are necessary
Dr Shashank – Thank you Sir. This second deluge that has come in rapidly. This virus is faster moving than the first wave. But the good thing is that the recovery rate is higher and mortality rate pretty low. There are 2 – 3 differences here. The first is – to an extent, it has been observed in youth and children too. And the symptoms…like the earlier one…breathlessness, dry cough, fever…all these are there…along with it, loss of smell and taste are also there. And people are a bit scared. There is absolutely no need of being scared. 80 to 90 percent people do not show any of these symptoms. What they call Mutation – there’s no need to be afraid of that. These mutations keep on happening…the way we change our clothes, the virus keeps changing its colours…hence there is nothing to fear and we shall overcome this wave too. Waves keep coming and going, the virus keeps coming and going…these are the various symptoms and we have to be alert medically. Covid has a 14 to 21 day’s timetable, in which we should avail of the Doctor’s advice.
PM – Dr Shashank, the analysis that you mentioned is interesting for me too. I have received many letters containing numerous apprehensions of people regarding treatment…the demand for certain medicines is very high…that’s why I want you to tell people about the treatment of Covid, as well.
Dr Shashank – Yes Sir. People start clinical treatment very late…in the belief that the illness will subside on its own…they believe in what they keep watching on their Mobile feeds. If they abide by information provided by the government, they will not face these difficulties. In Covid, the clinical treatment protocol has magnitude of three types – light or mild Covid, medium or moderate Covid and intense, what is called severe Covid. In the case of mild Covid, we do oxygen monitoring, pulse monitoring and fever monitoring. If the fever rises, sometimes we use medicines like paracetamol…and one should consult a Doctor. In the case of moderate or severe Covid, it is extremely important to contact the Doctor. Correct and inexpensive medicines are available. Steroids can save life…inhalers can be given, tablets can be given. And along with that, oxygen has to be administered…there are many simple treatments available. But often what is happening is – there is a new experimental medicine called Remdesivir. But one thing about this medicine is that one has to stay 2 – 3 days lesser in the hospital and it aids in clinical recovery. And this medicine too works only when it is taken in the first 9-10 days…and it is to be taken only for five days. The way people are running after Remdesivir…they should stop doing that. This medicine has a limited role…it should be taken only when people are put on oxygen in a hospital, strictly as per the Doctor’s advice. It is important for all people to understand this. If we do PRANAYAM, our lungs will expand a bit. And there’s an injection available for thinning blood…it is called Heparin. If these simple medicines are given, 98% people recover. So, staying positive is very important. It is imperative that treatment protocol is as per the Doctor’s advice. And it is not at all required to run after all these expensive medications. Sir, we have excellent treatments, we have oxygen, we have ventilator facilities…we have everything Sir. Whenever this medicine is available, it should be given only to appropriate people. On this, many myths are doing the rounds. Sir, I want to clarify that we have the world’s best treatment available…you will see that India has the best recovery rate. If you compare Europe, America, our patients are recovering through our treatment protocols.
PM – Dr Shashank, many thanks to you. The pieces of information that Dr Shashank gave us are very important and useful for all of us.
Friends,
I urge all of you…if you need any information, if you have any apprehension, get the information only from the correct source. You can consult your family doctor or doctors in the neighbourhood on the phone. I am noticing that many of our doctors are taking upon themselves this responsibility, on their own. Many doctors are providing information to people through social media. They are counseling on phone and WhatsApp. Many hospitals have websites where information is available…there you can seek advice of doctors too. This is commendable.
Joining me is Dr Naveed Nazeer Shah from Srinagar. Dr Naveed is a professor at a Government Medical College in Srinagar. Naveed ji has cured many a Corona patient under his supervision. In this holy month of Ramzan, Dr Naveed is performing his duty and has also taken out time to talk to us. Come, let’s speak to him.
PM – Naveed ji namaskar
Dr Naveed – Namaskar Sir
PM – Dr Naveed, during these difficult times, our listeners of Mann ki Baat have raised the question of Panic Management. Through your experience, what will you answer them?
Dr Naveed – See, when Corona began, the first hospital in Kashmir to be designated as Covid Hospital was our City Hospital, which comes under a medical college. The atmosphere then was that of fear. At least in people, it was so. They used to feel that perhaps, if a person contracts Covid, it would be taken as a Death Sentence. And amidst that, the doctors and paramedical staff working at our hospital also underwent that sense of fear…how will we face these patients…aren’t we at a risk of contracting the infection! But as time passed, we too observed that if we wear protective gear fully, abide by precautions colllectively; we too, including our staff can stay safe. As time passed by, we kept on noticing that some patients or people who were ill were asymptomatic, who displayed no symptoms of the infection. We saw that close to 90-95% of the patients are those who recover without in-medication…thus, with the passage of time, the fear of corona in the minds of people largely reduced. Today what we refer to as the Second Wave that has come in this time…there is no need to panic this time around too. Amidst this occurrence too, if we adhere to the protective measures, the SOPs such as wearing masks, using hand sanitizers…beyond that, if we maintain physical distance and avoid social gathering, we can carry on with our daily work and keep ourselves protected from this infection too.
Modi ji- Dr. Naveed people have many questions regarding the vaccine too, like how much protection we will get from the vaccine, how assured we can feel after the vaccine? Tell us something about this; listeners will be greatly benefitted.
Dr. Naveed- From the time since the corona infection has surfaced before us, till today, we don’t have any effective treatment available…we can fight this disease with only two things -one is protective measures … and we have already been saying that if we get some effective vaccine we can overcome this disease. Our country presently has two vaccines available Covaccine and Covishield which have been made here itself. Other companies too who have done their trials have found that its efficacy is more than 60%. And if we talk of Jammu Kashmir, till now, 15 to 16 lakh people have taken the vaccine. Yes, quite a few misconceptions or myths about this have come up on social media enumerating the side effects … till now, in our place, no side effects have been found in vaccines that have been administered. Only things that are routinely associated with every vaccine – someone getting fever, ache in the entire body or getting pain locally where injection is applied- we have seen such side effects in all patients ;we have not seen any gross adverse effect. And yes , secondly,some people had the apprehension that after vaccination, that is on getting the vaccine, some people got positive. In this, companies themselves have given guidelines that if someone is vaccinated, they may have infection, they can get positive. But the severity of the disease, that is its intensity in such patients will not be so much, that is, they may get positive but the disease can not prove to be fatal in them. So we should remove from our mind such misconception about the vaccine. Whosoever’s turn comes…Because from 1st May, vaccine administration programme for all those above 18 years in the entire country will begin, it is an appeal to the people that come and get vaccinated and protect yourselves and overall, our society and our community will be protected from Covid 19 infection.
Modi ji- Dr Naveed many many thanks to you, and best wishes to you for the pious month of Ramazan.
Dr. Naveed- Many many thanks.
Modi ji: Friends, in this period of Corona crisis, all are getting aware of the importance of vaccine … so it is my appeal that don’t get swayed by any rumour about the vaccine. You all must be knowing that people above 45 years of age can benefit from the free vaccine that has been sent to all state governments by the government of India. Now from 1st May onwards ,the vaccine is going to be made available for every person above 18 years in the country. Now the Corporate Sector, companies too will be able to participate in the programme of administering vaccine to their employees. I also want to say that the programme of free vaccine by the government of India that is going on now will continue further too. I appeal also to the states to extend the benefit of this free vaccine campaign of government of India to maximum number of the people of their state.
Friends,
we all know how difficult mentally it is to take care of ourselves, our family during disease. But our nursing staff in hospitals has to do this very job continuously, with so many patients at the same time. This sense of service is a great strength of our society. Only a nurse can tell properly about the service and hard work of the nursing staff. That is why, in Mann Ki Baat, I have invited sister Bhavana Dhruv ji who is providing her services at B R Ambedkar Medical College in Raipur. She is taking care of several Corona patients. Come , let us talk to her.
Modi ji- Namaskaar Bhavana ji!
Bhavana-Respected Prime Minister ji, Namaskar!
Modi ji- Bhavana ji…
Bhavan- Yes sir
Modi ji- Do tell the audience of Mann Ki Baat how you have so many responsibilities in family, so much multitasking and yet, along with that, you are working with Corona patients. The experience that you have with Corona patients, people of the country would definitely like to hear that because sisters, nurses are closest to the patient for the longest duration, so they can understand every aspect in great detail…please tell us.
Bhavana- Yes Sir… my total experience in COVID is 2 months. We do our duties for 14 days and after that we are given rest. Then after 2 months our Covid duties are repeated sir. When I was put on Covid duty for the first time, first of all I shared this Covid duty part with my family members. This was in May. And as I shared this, all got scared, worried … they started telling me that I should work with care…it was an emotional situation Sir. When my daughter asked me, “Mamma you are going for Covid duty?”… it was a very emotional moment for me. But when I went near a Covid patient, I had left a responsibility at home. And when I met Covid patients Sir, they were much more frightened than them. All the patients were so frightened by the name Covid that they were not able to understand what was happening to them or what we would do further. To remove their fear we gave them a very healthy environment. When we were told to do COVID duty, first of all, we were asked to wear a PPE Kit, which is quite difficult… to do duty with the PPE Kit on. Sir this was very tough for us …in 2 months duty, I have worked everywhere …14- 14 days duty in wards, in ICU, in Isolation.
Modi ji- That means, in all, you have been doing this very work for the past one year.
Bhavana- Yes Sir; before going there I did not know who my colleagues were. I worked as a team member… whatever problem they had… I shared, I came to know about the patients and removed their stigma, there were many people who were frightened of even the name of Covid. They showed all symptoms… when we used to take their history, but because of fear they wouldn’t be able to get their test done, then we would counsel them … and Sir when severity would increase, by then their lungs would have already been infected…by the time they came they would need ICU by then and with them their entire family would come. So I have seen 1-2 such cases sir and not just that …I have worked with all age groups. In that were small kids, ladies, men, senior citizens… all kinds of patients sir. When we talked to them they said that they did not come because of fear, we got the same answer from all. Then we counselled them Sir, that there is nothing to fear, just follow us … we will support you … follow whatever protocol is there. We could do only this much for them.
Modi ji- Bhavana ji, I felt nice talking to you, you have given me quite good information. You have shared by your experience, definitely this will send a message of positivity to the countrymen. Many many thanks to you Bhavana ji.
Bhavan- Thank you so much sir…thank you so much….Jain Hind sir.
Modi ji- Jai Hind!
Hundreds of thousands of brothers and sisters like Bhavana Ji and countless others from Nursing Staff are performing their duties exemplarily. This is a big inspiration for all of us. Pay special attention to your health as well. Take care of your family too.
Friends, Sister Surekha ji is now connected with us from Bengaluru at this time. Surekha Ji is Senior Nursing Officer in K.C. General Hospital. Come let us get to know about her experiences also –
Modi ji: Namaste Surekha ji!
Surekha: – I am really proud and honored sir to speak to prime minister of our country.
Modi Ji:- Surekha ji…You along with all fellow nurses and hospital staff are doing excellent work. India is thankful to you all. What is your message for the citizens in this fight against COVID-19.
Surekha:- Yes sir… Being a responsible citizen I would really like to tell something like please be humble to your neighbors and early testing and proper tracking help us to reduce the mortality rate and moreover please if you find any symptoms isolate yourself and consult nearby doctors and get treated as early as possible. So, community need to know awareness about this disease and be positive, don’t be panic and don’t be stressed out. It worsens the condition of the patient. We are thankful to our Government proud to have a vaccine also and I am already vaccinated with my own experience I wanted to tell the citizens of India, no vaccine provides 100% protection immediately. It takes time to build immunity. Please don’t be scared to get vaccinated. Please vaccinate yourself; there is a minimal side effects and I want to deliver the message like, stay at home, stay healthy, avoid contact with the people who are sick and avoid touching the nose, eyes and mouth unnecessarily. Please practice physically distancing, wear mask properly, wash your hands regularly and home remedies you can practice in the house. Please drink ayurvedic kaadha(आयुर्वेदिककाढ़ा), take steam inhalation and mouth gargling everyday and breathing exercise also you can do it. And one more thing last and not the least please have a sympathy towards frontline workers and professionals. We need your support and co-operation. We will fight together. We will get through with the pandemic. This is what my message to the people sir.
Modi ji:- Thank you surekha ji.
Surekha:- Thank you sir.
Surekha ji, indeed, you are holding fort in a very difficult time. Take care of yourself! I wish the very best for your family. I will also urge the people of the country, as Bhavna Ji, Surekha ji, have narrated from their experiences. Positive Spirit is imperative to fight Corona and the countrymen have to maintain the very same positive spirit.
My dear friends,
along with Doctors and Nursing Staff, at the moment frontline Workers like Lab-Technicians and Ambulance Drivers are also working in a godlike manner ! When an Ambulance reaches a patient, the family feels as if an angel has visited them in form of an Ambulance Driver! The country must know about all the services rendered by them & about their experiences! I have one such gentleman with me right now – Mr. Prem Verma ji, who is an Ambulance Driver. As his name denotes, Prem Verma ji does his work, his duty, with full love and dedication. Come! Let’s talk to him –
Modi ji – Namaste Prem ji |
Prem ji – Namaste sir ji |
Mr. Modi – Bhai! Prem |
Prem ji – yes sir.
Modi ji – About your work.
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – Do tell us in detail. Also tell us about your experiences.
Prem ji – I am on the post of driver with CATS Ambulance and as soon as Control gives us a call on a tab… We respond to the call that comes from 102 and head towards the patient. We go to the patient and for the last two years we are continuing this work. We wear our kit, wearing our gloves & mask, reach the patient and wherever they ask us to drop, in whichever hospital, we drop them as soon as possible.
Modi ji – You must have had both doses of vaccine?
Prem ji – Absolutely sir.
Modi ji – Then what is your message for others to get vaccinated?
Prem ji – Sir Absolutely | Everyone should get this dose and it is good for the family as well. Now my mom insists that I quit this job. I told her- mother, if I too leave the job and sit idle, then who will carry these patients? Because everyone is deserting, leaving behind their jobs in this period of corona! Everyone is leaving the job. Mom tells me to leave that job. I said no mom, I will not leave the job!
Modi ji – Prem Ji do not hurt mother. Try to convince your mother.
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – But this thing you told about your mother?
Prem ji – Yes.
Modi ji – It is very touching.
Prem ji – Yes.
Modi ji – To your mother too.
Prem ji – Yes.
Modi ji – Do convey my pranam.
Prem ji – Absolutely
Mr. Modi – And Yes?
Prem ji – yes Sir
Modi ji – and Prem ji through you
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – These drivers running our ambulance service too
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – How much risk you all taking at your jobs!
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – and what does everyone’s mother think?
Prem ji – Absolutely sir
Modi ji – When this conversation will reach the audience
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – I definitely believe that it will touch their hearts too!
Prem ji – yes
Modi ji – thank you very much, Prem ji. In a way, you are an example of what we call the flow of the Ganges of love!
Prem ji – Thank you sir
Modi ji – thanks bhaiyya!
Prem ji – Thank you.
Friends,
Prem Verma ji and thousands of people like him today are serving the people by putting their own lives at stake! Ambulance Drivers have also contributed a lot to all the lives that have been saved in this fight against Corona. Premji, I commend you and all your colleagues across the country. keep reaching on time, keep saving lives!
My dear countrymen, it is true that many people are getting infected with Corona. However, the number of people recovering from Corona is equally high. Preeti Chaturvedi of Gurugram has also recently defeated Corona. Preeti ji is joining us in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Her experiences will be of immense benefit for all of us.
Modi ji : Preeti ji, Namaste
Preeti ji : Namaste Sir. How are you doing?
Modi ji : I am fine . First of all, as for Covid19
Preeti ji : Ji
Modi ji : you successfully overcame it
Preeti ji : Ji
Modi ji : I would like to appreciate you for that.
Preeti ji : Thank you so much Sir
Modi ji : I wish for the faster recovery of your health
Preeti ji : Ji thank you Sir
Modi ji : Preeti ji
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : Is it just you who got infected in the current wave or have other members of your family been affected by it too?
Preeti ji : No no Sir, it was just me
Modi ji : God has been kind. Well, I would like
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : That you share some experiences of the state of your suffering … then, perhaps those listening in right now may also get guidance on how to handle themselves at such a time.
Preeti ji : Sure Sir. In the initial stage, I got extremely lethargic and after that there was a slight soreness of the throat. I felt that these were symptoms and so I got myself tested. On the second day, as soon as the report came in and I was diagnosed positive, I quarantined myself. I isolated myself in a room and consulted with doctors. I started the prescribed medication .
Modi ji : So your family was saved due to quick action on your part.
Preeti ji : Yes Sir. They got tested later too.Everyone else was negative. I was the only positive. Prior to that, I had isolated myself inside a room. After keeping all my necessities, I locked myself in the room. And along with that, I again started medication with the doctor. Sir, along with medication, I started yoga &Ayurvedic.Along with that I also started taking kadha, decoction. In order to boost my immunity Sir, in the day, whenever I used to take my food, I took healthy food, which was a protein rich diet. I took a lot of fluid, I gargled , inhaled steam and took hot water. I incorporated all of this as part of my daily routine. And Sir, I would like to say that these days, the most important thing is … one shouldn’t get worried at all. One has to remain mentally strong and for me, yoga and breathing exercise helped and I felt better doing them.
Modi ji : Yes. Preeti ji, now that your process is complete, you have come out of the crisis
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : You have tested negative too…
Preeti ji : Yes Sir
Modi ji : So what are you doing right now to take care of your health?
Preeti ji : Sir, I have not stopped doing Yoga
Modi ji : Ok
Preeti ji : I am still taking decoction and to boost my immunity, I am eating good, healthy food.
Modi ji : Yes
Preeti ji : I used to earlier neglect my own self but now I pay a lot of attention to my own being.
Modi ji : Thank you Preeti ji
Preeti ji : Thank you so much Sir.
Modi ji : I think the information you shared will help a lot of people. May you stay healthy; may your family members stay healthy, I wish you all the best.
My dear countrymen,
today, our personnel from the medical field, frontline workers are all endeavouring 24×7 in service work. Similarly, other people of the society also are not lagging behind at this time. The country is once again united and fighting against Corona. These days, I see that someone is delivering medicines to families living in quarantine, someone is sending vegetables, milk, fruits etc. Someone is offering free ambulance services to patients. Even in such challenging times, in different corners of the country, voluntary organizations are coming forward and trying to do whatever they can to help others. This time, new awareness is also being seen in the villages. By strictly following the Covid rules, people are protecting their village from the corona, proper arrangements are also being made for those who are coming from outside. Many young people have also come forward in the cities, working together with the local residents, in order to prevent the rise of Corona cases in their area. Meaning, on the one hand, the country is working day and night for hospitals, ventilators and medicines and on the other hand, the countrymen are also fighting the challenge of Corona with a lot of heart. This resolve gives us so much strength, so much confidence. Whatever efforts are being made are of great service to the society. They strengthen the power of society.
My dear countrymen,
today we kept the entire conversation of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ focused on the corona pandemic, because, today, our biggest priority is to defeat this disease. Today is also Bhagwan Mahavir Jayanti. On this occasion, I convey my good wishes to all the countrymen. The messages of Bhagwan Mahavir inspire us towards perseverance and self-restraint. The holy month of Ramzan is also going on. There is also Buddha Purnima ahead. There is also the 400th Prakash Parv of Guru Tegh Bahadur ji. A landmark day ahead is PochisheBoishak – Tagore Jayanti. All these inspire us to perform our duties. As a citizen, the more we perform our duties with efficiency in our lives, the faster we will move on the path of the future, free from crisis. With this wish, I once again urge all of you to get vaccinated and we also have to take full care. ‘Dawaibhi, Kadaibhi’ – Get vaccinated and maintain all precautions. Never forget this mantra. We will soon prevail together over this calamity. With this belief, I thank you all very much. Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. We are seeing how the country is fighting against Covid-19 with all her might. This has been the biggest pandemic in the last hundred years and during this very pandemic, India has confronted many a natural disaster with fortitude. Meanwhile, there were cyclone Amphan and cyclone Nisarg…many states had floods…there were many minor and major earthquakes; there were landslides. Just recently, in the past ten days, the country faced two major cyclones – cyclone Taukte on the west coast and cyclone Yaas on the east coast. Both these cyclones affected a number of States. The country and her people fought them with all their strength, ensuring minimum loss of life. We experience now that compared to earlier times, we are being able to save the lives of maximum people. Under these trying and extraordinary calamitous circumstances, people of all these cyclone affected States have displayed courage…they’ve faced this moment of crisis with immense patience and discipline. I wish to commend all citizens respectfully, wholeheartedly. People who led rescue and relief work deserve more appreciation than can be expressed. I salute all of them. The Centre, State governments and local administration have come together to face this calamity. My heart goes out to all the people who’ve lost their near and dear ones. Let us all firmly stand by those who have borne the brunt of this disaster.
My dear countrymen, however big the challenge be, India’s victory-resolve, her Vijay-Sankalp has always been equal in magnitude. Her collective strength and our spirit of service has always rescued the country from the midst of every storm. We’ve seen in the days gone by how our doctors, nurses and frontline warriors have toiled day and night without bothering about themselves, and continue to do so. Amidst all this, there indeed are people who’ve played a major role in the fight against the second wave of Corona. Many listeners of Mann Ki Baat, on NamoApp and through letters, have urged me to touch upon these warriors.
Friends, when the second wave came, the demand for oxygen surged all of a sudden…this was a very big challenge…delivering medical oxygen to remote parts of the country was indeed a huge task. If an oxygen tanker moves fast, the slightest error can lead to the risk of a big explosion. Many plants manufacturing industrial oxygen are located in the eastern parts of the country…transporting oxygen from there to other states of the country requires many days. In confronting this challenge, the country was helped by cryogenic tanker drivers, the Oxygen Express and Air Force pilots…many such people worked on a war footing, saving the lives of hundreds of thousands of people. Joining us in Mann Ki Baat today is one such friend – Shriman Dinesh Upadhyay ji, resident of Jaunpur, U.P.
Modi ji – Dinesh ji, Namaskar
Dinesh Upadhyay ji – Sir ji Pranaam.
Modi ji – First of all, I’d want you to definitely tell us something about yourself.
Dinesh ji – Sir, my name is Dinesh Babulnath Upadhyay. I am a resident of village Hasanpur, Post Jamua, District Jaunpur.
Modi ji – You are from U.P.!
Dinesh ji – Yes…Yes Sir
Modi ji – Ji
Dinesh ji – And Sir, I have a son, two daughters…also my wife and parents.
Modi ji – And what do you do?
Dinesh ji – Sir, I drive an oxygen tanker…for liquid oxygen.
Modi ji – Are the children carrying on well with their studies?
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. They are studying. Both daughters as well as the son are studying Sir.
Modi ji – Are their online studies going on well?
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir, they are doing it well. Right now, my daughters are studying, that too online Sir. I’ve been driving an oxygen tanker for 15 – 17 years Sir.
Modi ji – Okay, you’ve been transporting oxygen for 15 – 17 years! Then you are not just a truck driver! In a way, you are engaged in saving the lives of lakhs of people.
Dinesh ji – Sir, our line of work is like that! Sir, our Company of oxygen tankers, Inox Company also takes good care of us. And wherever we deliver oxygen, it gives us a lot of happiness.
Modi ji – But during these Corona times, your responsibilities have increased a lot!
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir, it has increased a lot.
Modi ji – When you are on the driving seat of your truck, what thoughts cross your mind? Any new experience compared to earlier times? There must be a lot of pressure…a lot of stress! Concerns regarding the family, the Corona atmosphere, pressures from people, demands! What all must be happening!
Dinesh ji – Sir, that doesn’t bother us. For us, it’s just that we are fulfilling our duty…if delivering oxygen on time gives life to someone, it is a matter of great honour for us.
Modi ji – You are expressing your sentiment very well. Okay, tell us…today, during these pandemic times when people are noticing the importance of your work, which perhaps they didn’t realise earlier…has it led to a change in the way they view you and your work?
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. Earlier, oxygen drivers like us used to be caught up in jams, somewhere or the other. But in present times, the administration has helped us a lot. And wherever we go, we feel an inner eagerness within…how soon can we reach and save people’s lives! Whether one gets to eat or not…or facing any other problem…when we reach hospital with the tanker, we see people at the hospital there gesturing at us with a V sign…people whose family members are admitted.
Modi ji – Okay, they indicate the V for victory!
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. Some show a V, others raise a thumbs up. It gives us a lot of satisfaction…we must have done a good deed in life to get an opportunity to offer such service.
Modi ji – All your fatigue must be vanishing!
Dinesh ji – Yes…Yes Sir.
Modi ji – So, do you come home and tell your children about that?
Dinesh ji – No sir. My children stay in the village. I am here at Inox Air Products as a driver.I go home after 8-9 months.
Modi ji – So, at times, you must be talking to the children on the phone!
Dinesh ji – Yes Sir. Regularly.
Modi ji – Then they must be feeling that their father should take care of himself amidst all this!
Dinesh ji – Sir, they say, “Papa, work…but do it with along with your own safety.” And we work with safety. We have a plant in Maangaon too. Inox helps us a lot.
Modi ji – Fine. Dinesh ji, I felt really nice listening to you. And even the country will get to know how people are working in this fight against Corona. For nine odd months, you are not meeting your children and family, just to ensure that people’s lives are saved. When the country listens to this, she will feel proud that we shall win the battle, since lakhs of people like Dinesh Upadhyaya ji are persevering, leaving no stone unturned!
Dinesh ji – Sir, one day or the other, we shall certainly defeat Corona!
Modi ji – Fine Dinesh ji…your sentiment is the strength of the country. Many thanks Dinesh ji. And please convey my blessings to your children.
Dinesh ji – Shall do it Sir. Pranaam.
Modi ji – Thank you.
Dinesh ji – Pranaam, pranaam.
Modi ji – Thank you.
Friends, truly, as Dinesh ji was mentioning, when a tanker driver reaches a hospital with oxygen, he comes across as a godsent messenger. We can understand the magnitude of responsibility involved in such work…and the resultant mental pressure one undergoes.
Friends, at this very moment of challenge, to facilitate transportation of oxygen, Indian Railway too has stepped forward. Oxygen Express, oxygen rail has transported larger quantities of oxygen to all corners of the country, faster than oxygen tankers travelling by road. Mothers and sisters would be proud to hear that one oxygen express is being run fully by women. Every woman of the country will feel proud at that. Not just that, every Indian will feel proud. I have invited Shirisha Gajni, a loco pilot of Oxygen Express, to Mann Ki Baat.
Modi ji- Shirisha ji namastey!
Shirisha- Namastey sir! How are you?
Modi ji- I am very fine. Shirisha ji, I have heard that you are working as a railway pilot and I was told that your entire team of women is running this oxygen express. Shirisha ji you are doing a wonderful work. During corona times many women like you have come forward to give strength to the country to fight corona. You too are a very big example of woman power. But the country would like to know, I want to know where do you get this motivation from?
Shirisha- Sir, for me my motivation are my father – mother, sir. My father is a government employee, sir. Actually I have two elder sisters, sir. We are three members, ladies only but my father encourages us to work. My first sister is doing a government job in bank and I am settled in railways. My parents are very encouraging.
Modi ji- Ok Shirisha ji, you have served railways during normal days too. You have driven trains routinely but on the one hand there was so much demand for oxygen….you were ferrying oxygen… then it must have been a task with much responsibility; being a bit more responsible. Ferrying normal goods is a different matter, Oxygen is a very delicate thing too, what experience did you undergo?
Shirisha- I felt happy in doing this work. During oxygen special time I observed all – safety wise, formation wise and for any leakage. Next, Indian Railway too is supportive, sir. I was given green path to drive this oxygen, I reached 125 kilometres in one and a half hour with this train. Railway took this much responsibility, I also took responsibility, sir.
Modi ji- Great… Shirisha ji I congratulate you a lot and convey my special pranam to your father- mother who motivated their three daughters so much and promoted them greatly and thus encouraged them. And I feel… pranam to such parents too and to you all sisters as well who served the country like this and displayed such a spirit also. Many many thanks Shirisha ji.
Shirish- Thanks sir. Thank you, sir. I need your blessings.
Modi ji- May the blessings of All Mighty remain with you, blessings of mother-father be with you. Thanks ji.
Shirisha- Thanks sir.
Friends, just now we heard Shirisha ji. Her experiences inspire us, make us emotional too. In fact, this battle is so big… that in this like the railways our country is working through all the three ways- water, land, sky. On the one hand empty tankers are being flown to oxygen plants by Air Force planes, on the other, work on construction of new oxygen plants too is being completed. Along with that, oxygen, oxygen concentrators and cryogenic tankers from abroad also are being brought into the country. That is why, in this task Navy , Air Force, Army and our institutions like DRDO are also involved. So many of our scientists, industry experts and technicians too are working on a war footing. The countrymen are keen to know and to understand the work of all of them. That is why Group Captain Patnaik ji from the Air Force is joining us.
Modi ji- Patnaik ji, Jai Hind.
Grp. Cpt.- Sir Jai Hind. Sir I am Group Captain A.K. Patanik. Speaking from Air Force station Hindon.
Modi ji- Patnaik ji, during the war against corona you are handling a big responsibility. Going around the world to bring tankers, delivering tankers here. I would like to know as a soldier you have done a different kind of work. One has to run in warfare; today you are running to save lives. How are you feeling?
Group Captain- Sir we are fortunate to be able to help our countrymen at this moment of crisis. And these missions that have been assigned to us we are fulfilling them very well. Our training and support services that we have are assisting us fully and the best thing, Sir, is that the job satisfaction derived is of a very high level. And this is why we are able to do continuous operations.
Modi ji- Captain the efforts that you made these days… that too you had to do in very short time…How have you been placed these days?.
Group Captain- Sir, from the last one month we have been continuously lifting oxygen tankers and liquid oxygen containers from both domestic and international destinations, Sir. Sir, the Air force has completed more than about 1600 sorties and we have flown more than 3000 hours. We have completed nearly 160 international missions; due to which, from all places, oxygen tankers from domestic destinations which earlier took two to three days, now we can deliver from one place to another in two to three hours; in international missions too within 24 hours by doing continuous round the clock operations… Entire Air Force is engaged in this so that we can help the country by bringing in as many tankers as soon as possible.
Modi ji- Captain, internationally what all places did you have to run around?
Grp Cpt.- Sir, for us on short notice to Singapore, Dubai, Belgium, Germany and UK. To all these places different fleets of the Indian Air Force sir, IL-76 , C-17 and other planes had gone… C-130 which had gone by planning at very short notice. Because of our training and zeal, we were able to complete these missions timely sir.
Modi ji- See this time the country feels proud that whether it is water, land, sky our soldiers are engaged in fighting the battle against corona and captain you have fulfilled a big responsibility…many congratulations to you.
Group Captain- Sir thank you so much sir. We are trying our best. My daughter Aditi too is with me Sir.
Modi ji- That is nice!
Aditi- Namastey Modi ji
Modi ji- Namastey beti,namastey. Aditi how old are you?
Aditi- I am 12 years old and I study in class 8th.
Modi ji- So your father goes out, is in uniform!
Aditi-Yes! I feel very proud of him. Feel very proud that he is doing all this important work, helping so many people suffering from corona and bringing oxygen tankers and containers from so many countries.
Modi ji- But the daughter does miss her father so much, doesn’t she?
Aditi- Yes, I miss him a lot. Now a days he is not able to stay home much as he is going on so many international flights and delivering containers and tankers to production plants so that the people suffering from corona can get oxygen timely and their lives can be saved.
Modi ji- So beti, this work of saving lives through oxygen is now known to people in every house hold.
Aditi- Yes.
Modi ji – When your friend circle, your fellow students learn that your father is engaged in oxygen service, they must be looking at you with great respect?
Aditi – Yes, all my friends also say that your father is doing such an important job and you must be feeling very proud and it is then I do feel extremely proud and all of my family, my maternal grandparents, paternal grandmother, all of them are very proud of my father… my mother and her doctor colleagues they are also working day and night… and all the Armed Forces, uncles in my father’s squadron, and all the forces, all of the people, the army is working quite a lot….and I am sure that with everyone’s efforts, we will definitely win this battle against Corona.
Modi ji –It is said here that when a daughter speaks, Goddess Saraswati is very much present in her words and when Aditi is saying that we will definitely win, then in a way it becomes the voice of God. Ok Aditi, right now you must be studying online?
Aditi – Yes, right now all our classes are going on online and right now we are taking full precautions at home… and if one has to go out, then you must wear a double mask and everything else…we are maintaining all precautions and personal hygiene. We are observing safeguards with regards to everything.
Modi ji –Good beta, what are your hobbies? What do you like?
Aditi – My hobbies are swimming and basketball but now that has stopped a bit and during this lockdown and corona virus I have become very fond of baking and cooking and I do all the baking and cooking for my dad so when he returns after doing so much work then I make cookies and cakes for him!
Modi ji –Wah! It is really nice! Alright Beta after a long time you have got a chance to spend some time with your father, and it feels very good and I congratulate you captain and when I congratulate the captain I mean not only him but all our Forces-navy, army and air force, I salute everyone, the way they are operating cohesively! Thank you brother.
Grp. Cpt. – Thank You Sir.
PM Modi- Friends, the nation salutes these soldiers of ours, these warriors of ours for the work that they have done. Similarly, millions of people are toiling day and night. The tasks they are performing is not part of their routine work. This type of disaster has hit the world in a hundred years. We have met such a big calamity after a century, therefore, no one had any experience of this kind of work. Behind it lies the spirit of service for the country, and power of resolve. This is why the country has been able to do work that has never been done before. You can guess for yourself, in normal circumstances we used to produce 900 Metric Tonnes of liquid medical oxygen in a day. Now, it has expanded to generating more than 10 times the normal output and producing around 9500 Metric Tonnes per day. Our warriors are transporting this oxygen to far-flung corners of the country.
My dear countrymen, so many efforts were made in the country to distribute and provide oxygen, so many people came together that as a citizen, all these endeavors inspire you. Everyone has done their duty as part of a team. I have been told by Urmila ji from Bengaluru that her husband is a lab technician, and how he has been continuously performing task of testing in the midst of so many challenges.
Friends, at the beginning of Corona, there was only one testing lab in the country, but today more than two and a half thousand labs are in operation. Initially, only a few hundred tests could be conducted in a day, now more than 20 lakh tests are being carried out in a single day. So far, more than 33 crore samples have been tested in the country. This huge task is made possible only because of our colleagues like those mentioned. There are countless frontline workers engaged in the work of sample collection, going amidst infected patients, and taking their sample is an example of yeoman service. To protect themselves, these friends have to wear PPE Kit continuously even in sweltering heat. After that the sample reaches the lab. Therefore, when I was reading your suggestions and queries, I decided that these friends engaged in such services should also be discussed. We will also get to know a lot from their experiences. So now let’s talk to our friend Prakash Kandpal ji who works as a lab technician in Delhi.
Modi ji – Prakash ji Namaskar
Prakash Ji – Namaskar respected Prime Minister ji
Modi ji – Prakash ji, first of all tell about yourself to all of our listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. How long have you been doing this work and what has been your experience during the time of Corona, because the people of the country neither get to see you on television nor appear in newspapers, even then working and living in the lab like a sage! So I would like that through your account the countrymen will also get information about how work is going on in the country.
Prakash ji – I have been working as a lab technician for the last 10 years in the hospital called Institute of Liver and Biliary Sciences, an autonomus institution, under the Government of Delhi. My experience in health sector is of 22 years. Even before ILBS, I have worked in prestigious institutions like Apollo Hospital, Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Hospital, Rotary Blood Bank, Delhi. Sir, although in all of these medical institutions I served in the blood bank department, but since 1st April, 2020 last year, I have been working in the Covid testing lab under the Virology department of ILBS.
Undoubtedly during the Covid pandemic, there was a lot of strain on all the means and resources related to health but I personally consider this phase of cataclysm as an opportunity during which the nation, humanity, society expects and hopes for display of all that more responsibility, cooperation, strength and capability from us. And sir, when according to the expectation and hope of the nation, humanity and society, we function at our optimum which is equal to a drop of water, we work according to those standards and measure upto them, then there is a feeling of pride. Sometimes when our family members are apprehensive or even a little scared, on such an occasion, I remind them that the soldiers of our country on the borders who are always away from their families protecting the country in dire and extraordinary circumstances, compared to them whatever risk we undertake is less, is very less. So they too understand this thing and in a way they also cooperate with me and they also contribute in whatever kind of cooperation there is during the time of this calamity.
Modi ji – Prakash ji, on one hand the government is advocating everyone to keep a distance –or maintain distance from each other during the Corona pandemic. And you have to be in the midst of the corona virus by being at the forefront. You have to encounter it from the front. So it is a life-threatening affair in itself, and therefore it is very natural for the family to be worried. But still, this lab technician’s job is one of the common professions. And in such a pandemic, another dimension gets added to the work that you are doing. Therefore the working hours must have increased. You must be spending many an overnight in the lab. And because so many crores of people are being tested, the burden must have also increased. But for your own safety also, do you take precautions or not?
Prakash ji –Yes Sir, we do. Our ILBS lab is accredited by WHO, and thus all the protocols observed are of international standards. We follow the three-tier safety protocol with regards to our dress. We go to lab in it, and wearing it we work. And then there is a complete protocol of discarding the dress, another for labelling and also for testing! We work under these protocols. So sir, it is God’s grace that my family and most of my acquaintances are still untouched by this infection. And there is one thing that, if you are careful and observe caution you can avoid it to an extent.
Modi ji – Prakash ji, thousands of people like you have been stationed in the labs for the last one year and have been doing such arduous work, saving innumerable people, about which the nation is getting to know today! Prakash ji, through you I, thank all the members of your fraternity. I thank you wholeheartedly on behalf of the countrymen. And you stay healthy. May you and your family stay healthy. I wish you all the best.
Prakash Ji – Thank you, Prime Minister ji. I am very grateful to you for giving me this opportunity.
Mr. Modi – Thank you brother.
PM Modi: Friends, I may have conversed with Bhai Prakash ji but in way, through his words, the fragrance of service rendered by thousands of lab technicians is reaching us. In his words you not only get a glimpse of the sense of service evident in thousands and lakhs of people but we also come to realize our responsibility. The kind of hard work and commitment that our friends like Bhai Prakash ji are putting in their work, that very quantum of cooperation from them will greatly help in defeating Corona.
My dear countrymen, while at present we were discussing our ‘Corona Warriors’ we have been a witness of their dedication and hard work in the last one and a half years. But there also has been a very big role in this fight displayed by many such warriors across the country. Think for yourself, our country faced such a big crisis that it affected every system of the country. The agricultural sector protected itself from this attack to a great extent. Not only did it keep itself safe, but the sector also progressed, moving forward. Do you know that even in this pandemic, our farmers have achieved record produce! The farmers produced record output and this time the country went on to procure record amount of crops. This time in many places farmers have got more than the minimum support price (MSP) for mustard. Due to the record food grain production, our country has been able to provide support to every countryman. Today, 800 million underprivileged denizens are being provided free ration in this hour of crisis. So, no such a day ever occurs in a needy home when the stove is not lit!
Friends, today the farmers of our country are doing wonders in many areas by taking advantage of the new arrangements. Take for example, the farmers of Agartala. These farmers produce very good jackfruit harvest. Anticipating their demand in the country and abroad, this time the jackfruit of farmers of Agartala was brought to Guwahati by rail. These jackfruit are now being sent to London from Guwahati. Similarly, you must have also heard the name of the Shahi Litchi of Bihar. In 2018, the Government also gave GI Tag to Shahi Litchi so that its identity would be reinforced and the farmers would get more benefits. This time the Shahi Litchi of Bihar has also been sent to London by air. From East to West, North to South our country is full of such unique flavors and products. You must definitely have heard about the mangoes of Vizianagaram in South India. Now who wouldn’t like to eat this mango? Therefore, now the Kisan Rail is ferrying hundreds of tons of Vizianagaram mangoes to Delhi. The people of Delhi and North India will get to eat Vizianagaram mangoes, and the farmers of Vizianagaram will earn well. The Kisan Rail has so far transported nearly 2 lakh tonnes of produce. Now the farmers are able to send fruits, vegetables, grains to other remote parts of the country at a very low cost.
My dear countrymen, today on 30th May we are having ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and incidentally it also marks the completion of 7 years of the government. Over these years, the country has followed the mantra of ‘Sabka-Saath, Sabka-Vikas, Sabka-Vishwas’. All of us have worked every moment with dedication in the service of the country. Many friends have sent me letters and said that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I should also discuss our mutual journey of 7 years. Friends, whatever we have accomplished in these 7 years, it has been of the country, of the countrymen. Together, we have experienced many moments of national pride in these years. When we observe that now India moves ahead not with the thought and pressure of other countries but with her own conviction, then we all feel proud. When we witness that now India gives a befitting reply to those who conspire against us, then our confidence soars. When India does not compromise on the issues of national security, when the strength of our armed forces increases, we feel that yes, we are on the right path.
Friends, I get messages and letters from countless countrymen spanning every corner of the country. Many people are thankful to the country that electricity has reached their village for the first time in 70 years, that their sons and daughters are studying in the light, under the fan. Many people say that our village too is now connected to the city by a paved road. I remember some friends from a tribal area had sent me a message that after the road was built, for the first time they felt that they too had joined the rest of the world. Similarly, someone shares the joy of opening a bank account, someone starts a new employment with the help of different schemes, then they also invite me in sharing that happiness. I keep receiving many invitations from our countrymen for the occasion of ‘GrihPravesh’ – the house warming ceremony, after receiving their home under the ‘Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana’. In these 7 years, I have been associated with a million moments of your happiness. Just a few days ago, a family from a village sent me a photo of the water tap installed in their house under the ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’. They had captioned the photo ‘मेरेगाँवकीजीवनधारा’ – the lifeline of my village, there are many such families! In the 7 decades after independence, only three and a half crore rural homes of our country had water connections. However, just in the last 21 months, four and a half crore houses have been given clean water connections. Of these, 15 months were of the Corona period! A similar confidence has come to the country through the ‘Ayushman Yojana’. When the poor come home healthy with free treatment, they feel that they have got a new life. They feel confident that the country stands by them. With the blessing of such families, the blessings of crores of mothers, our country is moving towards development with strength.
Friends, in these 7 years, India has worked to show the world a new direction in digital transactions. Today, you can make digital payments with absolute ease at any place; it is proving very useful even in this time of Corona. Today, the seriousness and awareness of the countrymen towards cleanliness is increasing. We are also launching record satellites and constructing record roads too. In these 7 years, many old contestations of the country have also been resolved with complete peace and harmony. A new confidence of peace and development has arisen from the northeast to Kashmir. Friends, have you thought all such work which could not be achieved even in decades, how were they done in these 7 years? All this was possible because in these 7 years, more than as the Government or as the people, we worked together as one country. We worked as a team. We worked as Team India. Every citizen has tried to take a few steps forward in advancing the country. Yes! Where there are successes, there are also trials. In these 7 years together, we have overcome many difficult tests as well, and each time we have all emerged stronger. In the form of the Corona pandemic, we are being continuously put to test. This is a crisis that has plagued the whole world, so many people have lost their loved ones. Even big countries were not spared from its devastation. In the midst of this pandemic, India is moving forward with the resolve of ‘सेवा और सहयोग’- ‘service and cooperation’. In the first wave, we fought courageously; this time too India will be victorious in the ongoing fight against the virus. Be it ‘दो गज की दूरी’ social distancing, rules related to masks or vaccines, there should be no letup in our efforts. This indeed is the path to our victory. Next time when we meet in Mann Ki Baat, we will talk about many more inspiring examples of countrymen and discuss new topics. Do continue to keep sending me your suggestions. May all of you stay healthy, keep the country moving forward in this manner. Many many thanks!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
Often in Mann Ki Baat there is a volley of your questions. This time I thought of doing something different, asking you questions, so listen carefully to my questions.
Who was the first Indian to win an Individual Gold at the Olympics?
In which game has India won the maximum number of medals at the Olympics?
Which player has won the maximum number of medals at the Olympics?
Friends,
you may or may not send answers to me, but by answering the Olympics quiz that is on MyGov you will win several prizes. Many questions like these are in the Road To Tokyo Quiz on MyGov. Participate in the Road to Tokyo Quiz, know how India has performed earlier, how is our preparation now for Tokyo Olympics, know all this for yourself and tell others too. I want to urge you all to definitely participate in this quiz competition.
Friends,
when we are talking of Tokyo Olympics, how can one forget the legendry athlete Milkha Singh. Some days ago, Corona snatched him away from us. When he was in hospital, I got an opportunity to talk to him. While talking to him I had urged him. I had said that you have represented India in 1964 Tokyo Olympics, so this time when our players are going to Olympics in Tokyo, you have to boost the morale of our athletes, have to motivate them with your message. He was so committed and emotional for sports that he immediately gave his consent even during his illness. But unfortunately, providence had other plans. I still remember he had come to Surat in 2014. We had inaugurated a Night Marathon. The interaction that I had with him then, the chat about sports that happened, that inspired me a lot too. We all know that the entire family of Milkha Singh has been dedicated to sports…. has been adding to the glory of India.
Friends,
when Talent, Dedication, Determination and Sportsman Spirit come together only then a champion is made. In our country most of the sportspersons hail from the smaller towns and villages. Our team that is going to Tokyo too has many such players whose life inspires a lot. When you hear about our Praveen Jadhav ji , then you too will feel… how many difficulties Praveen has gone through to reach here. Praveen hails from a village in Satara district of Maharashtra. He is very good at Archery. His parents run the family by working as labourers and now their son is going to participate in his first Olympics at Tokyo. This is a matter of great pride not only for his parents but for all of us. Similarly, there is one more player, our Neha Goyal ji. Neha is a member of the women’s hockey team going to Tokyo. Her mother and sisters manage the family expenses by working in a cycle factory. Like Neha, Deepika Kumari ji’s life too has been full of ups and downs. Deepika’s father drives an auto rickshaw and her mother is a nurse, and now see, Deepika is at present the only female archer from India in the Tokyo Olympics. Our best wishes are with Deepika, once ranked world’s number one archer.
Friends,
wherever we reach in life, whatever height we attain this connection with the ground, always, keeps us bound to our roots. The joy of success experienced after a period of struggle is something else! Our players going to Tokyo faced scarcity of means and resources in their childhood, but they persevered, and endured with fortitude. The life of Priyanka Goswami ji of Muzaffarnagar, Uttar Pradesh also teaches a lot. Priyanka’s father is a bus conductor. As a child, Priyanka adored the bag that the medal winners were presented with. It was this fascination that made her participate in the Race-Walking competition for the first time. Now, she is a big champion of that.
Shivpal Singh ji, who participates in Javelin Throw, hails from Banaras. Shivpalji’s entire family is associated with this sport. His father, uncle and brother are all experts at javelin throw. This family tradition is going to be useful for him in the Tokyo Olympics. The example of Chirag Shetty and his partner SatwikSairaj going for the Tokyo Olympics is also inspiring. Recently, Chirag’s maternal grandfather died of corona. Satwik himself also became corona positive last year. But, despite these hurdles, both of them are preparing to give their best in the Men’s Double Shuttle Competition.
I would like to introduce you to another player, Manish Kaushik ji of Bhiwani, Haryana. Manish ji comes from an agricultural family. While working in the fields in his childhood, Manish became fond of boxing. Today this hobby of his is taking him to Tokyo. There is another player, C.A. Bhavani Devi Her name is Bhavani and she is adroit at fencing. Bhavani, who hails from Chennai, is the first Indian fencer to qualify in the Olympics. I was reading somewhere that in order for Bhavani ji’s training to continue, her mother had even mortgaged her jewellery.
Friends,
there are numerous such names, but in Mann Ki Baat, today I have been able to mention only a few. Every player going to Tokyo has had one’s own share of struggle, and years of toil. They are going not only for themselves but for the country. These players also have to enhance the glory of India and win the hearts of the people and that is why my countrymen I want to advise you too, that we should not pressurize these players knowingly or unknowingly, but support them with an open mind and bolster the enthusiasm of every player.
You can send your wishes to these players with #Cheer4India on social media. If you want to do something more innovative, then definitely do that too. If you come across any idea that the country should do collectively for our players, then you must send it to me. Together we will support our players going to Tokyo – Cheer4India!!! Cheer4India!!! Cheer4India!!
My dear countrymen,
the battle we the countrymen are fighting against corona is continuing…but in this fight, together, we have achieved many an extraordinary milestone! Just a few days ago, our country accomplished an unprecedented feat. On the 21st of June, the next phase of the vaccination campaign commenced…and that very day, the country registered a record of administering vaccines to over 86 lakh people, free of cost…that too on a single day! Such a huge number of free vaccinations by the Government of India; that too in a day. It is but natural that it was widely discussed.
Friends,
a year ago, the question that was confronting all was – When will the vaccine come! Today, in a day, we are administering the Made in India vaccine to lakhs of people, free of cost…and this indeed is the strength of New India.
Friends,
we have to keep making efforts to ensure that every citizen is able to avail of safety through the vaccine. At many places, in order to end vaccine hesitancy, myriad organizations and members of civil society have come forward…and together, they are doing a wonderful job… Come…let us too visit a village and speak to people about the vaccine…let’s go to village Dulariya, district Betul, Madhya Pradesh.
PM – Hello…
Rajesh – Namaskar.
PM – Namaste ji.
Rajesh –My name is Rajesh Hiraawe, Gram Panchayat Dulariya, Bhimpur Block.
PM – Rajesh ji, I called up since I wanted to know about the Corona situation in your village, as of now.
Rajesh – Sir…the Corona situation here…well, there’s nothing of that sort here!
PM – People are not ailing now…?
Rajesh – Ji
PM – What is the population of the village? How many people are there?
Rajesh – Sir, there are 462 men and 332 women in the village.
PM – Fine Rajesh ji, have you taken the vaccine?
Rajesh – No Sir, not yet…
PM – O…why not?
Rajesh – Sir, some people here created such a delusion on WhatsApp that many were misled Sir.
PM – So…even you bear a fear in your mind!
Rajesh – Yes sir…the entire village was being misled.
PM – Oh…what have you said? See Rajesh ji…
Rajesh – Ji
PM – I would like to urge you and all my brothers and sisters in the village to dispel fear, if any…
Rajesh – Ji
PM – In our country, over 31 crore people have got themselves vaccinated.
Rajesh – Ji
PM – You know very well…I’ve myself been vaccinated with both doses.
Rajesh – Ji Sir
PM – And my mother is close to a hundred years of age…she too has taken both doses! At times, some people develop fever on account of this…but it’s very minor; just for a few hours…See, not getting vaccinated can prove dangerous.
Rajesh – Ji
PM – That way, you expose yourself to risk; not just that, you can endanger the family as well as the village!
Rajesh – Ji
PM -And Rajesh ji, that is why, as soon as possible, get yourself vaccinated…and in the village, tell everyone that the vaccine is being administered by the Government of India, free of cost…and for all persons above 18 years of age, this vaccination is free.
Rajesh – Ji Ji
PM – So, do tell this to people in the village…and this is not at all a reason for an atmosphere of fear in the village!
Rajesh – Sir, the reason is – some of them have spread such a misleading rumour…that deeply scared people. For example, developing fever after taking the vaccine…the fever leading to other ailments…rumour has been spread to the extent that it leads to a person’s death!
PM – Alas!…. These days, there is so much of radio and television; so much of news…hence it becomes easy for making people understand. And let me tell you…there are many villages in India where people have availed of the vaccine…I mean, cent percent of them. I’ll give you one such example…
Rajesh – Ji
PM – There’s district Bandipora in Kashmir…in this district, people of village Weyan together set themselves a target of 100% vaccines…and also achieved it. Today, in this village in Kashmir, all persons above the age of 18 have taken the vaccine. I came to know about three villages in Nagaland also where people have been vaccinated a 100 percent.
Rajesh – Ji Ji
PM – Rajesh ji, you too should communicate this across your village and neighbouring villages…and the way you also put it – it is a fallacy…just something misleading.
Rajesh – Ji Ji
PM – So, the only way to address this fallacy is convincing others by getting yourself vaccinated. You will do that, won’t you?
Rajesh – Ji Sir.
PM – Will you do it for sure?
Rajesh – Ji Sir, Ji Sir. Talking to you made me feel that I should get myself vaccinated and mobilise others to get the same done.
PM – Okay. Is there anyone else in the village I could talk to?
Rajesh – Yes Sir…there is.
PM – Who will speak?
Kishorilal – Hello Sir, Namaskar.
PM – Namaste ji, who is speaking?
Kishorilal – Sir, my name is KishorilalDurve.
PM – So Kishorilal ji, we were just speaking to Rajesh ji.
Kishorilal – Ji Sir.
PM – And he was lamenting that people indulge in a lot of loose talk around the vaccine.
Kishorilal – Ji
PM – Have you too heard something like that?
Kishorilal – Yes…I have heard such things Sir.
PM – What have you heard?
Kishorilal – Since Sir, Maharashtra is close by, some relatives staying there spread rumours that people are dying because of the vaccine…some are getting sick…people are full of misconceptions, that is why they are not taking it Sir.
PM – No…what do they say? “Now Corona is over” – is that what they say?
Kishorilal-Ji
PM – Do they say that nothing happens due to Corona?
Kishorilal – No Sir…they don’t say that corona is gone. They say Corona is there, but that people who take vaccines are getting sick…all are dying. That is the situation they describe.
PM – Okay…meaning people are dying BECAUSE of the vaccine?
Kishorilal – Ours is a tribal area Sir…as it is, people get scared quickly…which leads to spreading of mistaken notions…that’s why people are not taking the vaccine Sir.
PM – See Kishorilal ji…
Kishorilal – Yes Sir
PM – Those spreading rumours will keep on doing so.
Kishorilal ji – Ji
PM – We have to save lives…we have to save our village…and our countrymen. If someone says Corona is gone, do not be under this mistaken notion.
Kishorilal – Ji
PM – This ailment is like a master of disguise.
Kishorilal – Ji sir
PM – It keeps changing its looks…surfaces in myriad new forms and colours.
Kishorilal – Ji
PM – And to protect ourselves from it, we have two ways. One is adhering to the protocol for Corona – wearing a mask, frequently washing hands with soap, maintaining distancing…and the other way is …along with all this, getting vaccinated…that too is a good safety shield…think about that.
Kishorilal – Ji.
Prime Minister- Ok Kishorilal ji tell us one thing
Kishorilal -Ji sir.
Prime Minister- When people talk to you, how do you communicate it to them? You try to convince people or do you get carried away by rumours?
Kishorilal- What to convince.., when there are people in large numbers, we too are overtaken by fear sir.
Prime Minister- Look Kishorilal ji, I have spoken to you, today you are my friend.
Kishorilal – Ji Sir.
Prime Minister-You don’t have to be afraid and have to remove fear from people too. Will you?
Kishorilal- Ji Sir. Will dispel that Sir, will remove fear from people too sir. I myself will get it done.
Prime Minister- Look, don’t at all pay attention to rumours.
Kishorilal- Ji.
Prime Minister- You know, how much hard work our scientists have put in to make this vaccine.
Kishorilal ji- Ji sir.
Prime Minister- Through the year many senior scientists have worked and that is why we have to believe in science, believe in scientists. And should explain to these propagators of falsehood that look brothers it is not so, so many people have taken vaccine, nothing untoward happens.
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- And we should keep ourselves very safe from rumours, save villages too.
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- And Rajesh ji, Kishorilal ji, to friends like you I would urge that work to stop these rumours not only in your village but in other villages too. And tell people that you interacted with me.
Kishorilal- Ji Sir.
Prime Minister- Tell them…tell them my name.
Kishorilal- Will tell sir and will explain to people and will have it ourselves too.
Prime Minister- See, convey my best wishes to your entire village.
Kishorilal- Ji Sir.
Prime Minister- And tell everyone that whenever their turn comes…
Kishorilal – Ji…
Prime Minister- Definitely get vaccinated.
Kishorilal- Definitely Sir.
Prime Minister- I would like that to the women of village, to our mothers and sisters…
Kishorilal- Ji sir
Prime Minister- Involve them more and more in this work and keep them actively associated with yourself.
Kishorilal- Ji.
Prime Minister- At times when mothers- sisters tell a thing people agree readily.
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- Will you update me when vaccination gets completed in your village?
Kishorilal- Yes, will tell sir.
Prime Minister- Sure, will you tell me?
Kishorilal- Ji
Prime Minister- Look, I will wait for your letter.
Kishorilal- Ji Sir.
Prime Minister- Ok, Rajesh ji, Kishore ji many many thanks. Got an opportunity to talk to you.
Kishorilal- Thanks Sir, you spoke to us. Many many thanks to you too.
Friends,
someday this will be a subject of case study for the world that how during this Corona period people of villages of India, our forest dwellers-tribal brothers-sisters, displayed their capabilities and understanding. People of villages set up quarantine centres, made Covid protocol as per local requirements. People of villages did not let anybody sleep hungry, did not let work in fields stop either. The villages also ensured daily supply of milk and vegetables to nearby cities that is, they took care of themselves and of others too. We have to keep doing the same way in the vaccination campaign too. We have to be aware and make others aware too. Every person in the village gets vaccinated – this should be the goal for all villages. Remember, and I specially want to tell you… Ask a question to yourself- everyone wants to be successful but what is the deciding mantra for success? The decisive mantra for success is continuity, so we don’t have to get lax, don’t have to get in delusion. We have to keep making efforts continuously…register victory over Corona.
My dear countrymen,
now the monsoon season has also arrived in our country. When the clouds rain, they rain not only for us, but also for the generations to come! Rain water also collects in the ground, it also replenishes the water level of the ground. And that’s why I consider water conservation as a form of service to the country. You too must have seen, many of us are taking this pious work as their responsibility. One such person is Satchidanand Bharti ji of Pauri Garhwal, Uttarakhand. Bharti ji is a teacher and he has imparted very good education to the people through his deeds. Today, due to his hard work, the huge water crisis in the Ufrainkhal area of ​​Pauri Garhwal has come to an end. Where people used to pine for water, today there is continuous supply of water throughout the year.
Friends,
in the hills there exists a traditional method of water conservation, which is called Chalkhal. That is, it involves digging a big pit to collect water. Bharti ji also added some new methods to this tradition. He regularly got small and big ponds dug. Due to this, not only the hills of Ufrainkhal turned green, but the problem of drinking water of the people was also solved. You will be surprised to know that Bharti ji has got more than 30 thousand such water tanks constructed. 30 thousand! This monumental work of his continues even today and is inspiring many people
Friends,
similarly the people of Andhav village in Banda district of UP have also made an innovative effort and have given a very interesting name to their campaign – ‘Khet ka pani khet mein, gaon ka panigaonmein’. Under this campaign, high bunds have been raised in several hundred bighas of fields of the village. As a result rain water started collecting in the field, and started percolating into the ground. Now, these people are also planning to plant trees on the bunds of the fields. That is, now farmers will get all three – water, trees and money! As it is the village is getting recognized far and wide due to its good work.
Friends,
taking inspiration from all of these efforts, we can also conserve water around us, in whatever way possible… we should save it. We must not to miss this crucial period of the monsoon season.
My dear countrymen,
it is said in our scriptures –
““नास्तिमूलम्अनौषधम्” ” “Nasti Moolam Anoushadham”
That is, there is no such plant on earth which does not have any medicinal properties! There are many such trees and plants around us, which have amazing properties, but many times we do not even know about them! Bhai Paritosh, a friend from Nainital has also sent me a letter on the same subject. He has written that he came to know about miraculous medicinal properties of Giloy and many other plants only after the outbreak of Corona! Paritosh has also urged me to tell all the listeners of Mann Ki Baat that we should know about the flora around us, and also convey to others. In fact, this is our centuries old heritage, which we have to preserve. In this direction, Mr. Ramlotan Kushwaha ji, a friend from Satna of Madhya Pradesh, has done a very commendable job. Ramlotan ji has built a museum of indigenous plantson his farm. In this museum, he has collected hundreds of medicinal plants and seeds. And he has brought them here from far flung regions. Apart from this, he also grows many types of Indian vegetables every year. People visit this garden, this museum of Ramlotan ji, and learn a lot from it. Indeed, this is a very good experiment which can be replicated in different regions of the country. I would like that those of you who can make such an effort, should attempt it. This can also open up new sources of income for you. Another benefit will be that the identity of your area will gain wide prominence through the local medicinal plants.
My dear countrymen,
a few days from now we will celebrate National Doctors Day on the 1st of July. This day is dedicated to the birth anniversary of the great doctor and statesman of the country, Dr B.C. Roy. We are all grateful for the contribution of doctors in the Corona period. Our doctors have served us without caring about their lives. Therefore, this time around National Doctors Day becomes all the more special.
Friends,
Hippocrates, one of the most respected persons in the world of medicine, had said:
“Wherever the art of Medicine is loved, there is also a love of Humanity.”
Doctors are able to serve us with the power of this very love. Therefore, it is our duty to thank them with an equal measure of affection and encourage them! By the way, there are many people in our country who have come forward and worked to help the doctors. I came to know about one such attempt from Srinagar. Here a Boat Ambulance Service was started at Dal Lake. This service was started by Tariq Ahmad Patloo ji of Srinagar, who is a Houseboat Owner. He himself has also fought the battle with COVID-19 and this inspired him to start the Ambulance Service. A campaign is also underway to make people aware of this ambulance, and continuous announcements from the ambulance are being made by him. The effort is that people should wear a mask and undertake other necessary precautions too.
Friends,
along with Doctors Day, Chartered Accountants Day is also celebrated on the 1st of July. A few years ago, I had asked for global level Indian audit firms as a gift from Chartered Accountants of the country. Today I want to remind them of that. Chartered Accountants can play a very worthy and positive role in bringing transparency to the economy. I extend my best wishes to all Chartered Accountants and their family members
My dear countrymen,
there is one great feature of India’s fight against Corona. Each and every person of the country has played their part in this fight. I have often spoken about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. But some people also complain that not a lot is discussed about them. Many people, whether they are bank staff, teachers, small traders or shopkeepers, people working in shops, street vendors, security watchmen, postmen and post office employees… Actually, this list is very long and everyone has played his or her part. Innumerable people have been involved with government and administration at different levels.
Friends,
you have probably heard the name of Guru Prasad Mohapatra ji, who was the Secretary to the Government of India. Today in “Mann Ki Baat”, I want to speak about him too. Guruprasad ji was diagnosed with Corona, he was admitted in the hospital and yet at the same time was performing his official duties too. He toiled day and night to increase the Oxygen producing capacities of the country and to ensure that Oxygen reached far flung areas. On the one hand, the affairs of the court, the pressure of the media, he kept fighting on many fronts simultaneously and did not stop working during his illness. Even after being told not to, he used to insist on joining the video conferences on oxygen. Such was his concern for his countrymen. He kept on making arrangements to deliver oxygen to the people of the country, regardless of himself being on the hospital bed. It is sad for all of us that the country has also lost this KarmaYogi ; Corona has snatched him away from us. There are countless people who have never been discussed. Our tribute to every such person would be that we follow the covid protocol fully, get our vaccinations done.
My dear countrymen,
the best thing about ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that you all contribute to it more than me. I saw a post on MyGov by Thiru R.Guruprasad ji from Chennai. You too will be pleased to know what he has written. He has written that he is a regular listener of the program “Mann Ki Baat”. I am quoting a few lines from Guruprasad ji’s post. He has written –
“Whenever you talk about Tamil Nadu, my interest increases even more.
You have discussed the greatness of Tamil language and Tamil culture, Tamil festivals and major places in Tamil Nadu.”
Guru Prasad ji further writes – “In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, you have also spoken many times about the achievements of the people of Tamil Nadu. What to say about your love for Thirukkural and your respect for Thiruvalluvar ji! That’s why I have prepared an E-Book by compiling all that you have spoken about Tamil Nadu in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Will you say something about this e-book and also release it on the Namo App? Thanks!”
‘I was reading the letter of Guruprasad ji for you.’
Guruprasad ji, I am very happy to read this post of yours. Now, add another page to your E-Book –
नान तमिलकला चाराक्तिन पेरिये अभिमानी |
नान उलगतलये पलमायां तमिल मोलियन पेरिये अभिमानी |
There could definitely be fault in pronunciation but my efforts and my love will never diminish. I want to tell those who are not Tamil speaking, what I have told Guruprasad ji –
‘I am a big admirer of Tamil culture.
I am a big admirer of Tamil, the oldest language in the world.’
Friends,
every Indian should cherish and feel proud that the most ancient language of the world belongs to our country. I take a lot of pride in Tamil. Guru Prasad ji, this effort of yours is going to give a new vision to me. When I do ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I put forth my point in a simple manner. I didn’t know that this was even a part, an element of it. When you collected all our old conversations, I read it not once but twice. Guruprasad ji, I will definitely get this book of yours uploaded on the Namo App. Best wishes to you for future endeavours.
My dear countrymen, today we talked about the difficulties and precautions pertaining to Corona and also discussed many achievements of the country and countrymen. Now another big opportunity is in front of us too. 15th August is also approaching. Amrit Mahotsav of 75 years of Independence is a big inspiration for us. Let us learn to live for the country. The Struggle for Independence is the story of those who died for the country, we have to make this post-Independence time the story of those who live for the country. Our mantra should be – India First. Every decision of ours, every decision should have the basis – India First!
Friends,
the country has also set many collective goals in the Amrit Mahotsav. Like, we have to revive the history related to our freedom fighters by remembering them. You will remember that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I appealed to the youth to research and write history of the freedom struggle. The motive was that young talents should come forward, young thinking, young thoughts should gain prominence, the young pen should write with new energy. I feel very happy to see that in a very short time more than two and a half thousand youth have come forward to do this work. Friends, the interesting thing is that the Struggle of the 19th – 20th century is usually talked about, but it is a matter of joy that the youth who have been born and brought up in the 21st century have taken up cudgels to bring to the forefront the history of the Freedom Struggle of 19th and 20th century. All these people have sent the full details on MyGov. These people will be writing on the freedom struggle in different languages of the country,such as Hindi – English, Tamil, Kannada, Bengali, Telugu, Marathi – Malayalam, Gujarati. Some are associated with the freedom struggle, gathering information about the places around them, while someone else is writing a book on tribal freedom fighters.This is a good start. I request all of you to join the Amrit Mahotsav, in whichever way you can. It is our good fortune that we are witness to the festival of 75 years of our Independence. Hence the next time we meet in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we will talk more about preparations for the Amrit Mahotsav. May all of you stay healthy, move forward following the rules related to Corona and keep giving momentum to the country with your new efforts. With best wishes, thank you very much!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. A few amazing pictures taken a couple of days ago, some memorable moments are still there in front of my eyes. Let us hence commence Mann Ki Baat this time, with those very moments. At the Tokyo Olympics, watching Indian sportspersons march carrying the Tricolour exhilarated not just me but the entire country…as if the whole country unitedly exhorted her warriors saying, “Vijayi Bhava – emerge victorious!” When these sportspersons had departed from India, I had the opportunity of chatting with them, knowing about them and conveying it to the country. These sportspersons have reached where they are after overcoming numerous hurdles in life. Today, they possess the strength of your love and support – that’s why, come…let us together extend our good wishes to all of them; encourage them. On social media, our Victory Punch Campaign for the support of Olympics sportspersons has begun. Do share your Victory Punch with your team…Cheer for India.
Friends, it is but natural to get emotional in honour of the one who bears the Tricolour in honour of the country. This feeling of patriotism unites all of us. Tomorrow, that is the 26th of July is Kargil Vijay Diwas as well. The Kargil war is one symbol of the bravery and patience on part of India’s Armed Forces which the whole world has watched. This time this pride filled day will be celebrated amid Amrit Mahotsav. That is why this day becomes all the more special. I wish you read the enthralling saga of Kargil…let us all bow to the bravehearts of Kargil.
Friends, this time on the 15th of August, the country is entering her 75th year of Independence. We are indeed very fortunate that we are witnessing 75 years of Freedom; a freedom that the country waited for, for centuries. You may remember, to commemorate 75 years of Freedom, Amrit Mahotsav had commenced on the 12th of March from Bapu’s Sabarmati Ashram. On this very day, Bapu’s Dandi Yatra too was revived…since then, from Jammu-Kashmir to Puduchery; from Gujarat to the Northeast, programmes in connection with Amrit Mahotsav are being held across the country. There are many such incidents, such freedom fighters whose contribution have been huge, but had not been adequately discussed…today, people are able to know about them. Now, take Moirang Day, for instance…the tiny town of Moirang in Manipur was once a major base of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose’s Indian National Army, INA. Here, even before Independence, Col Shaukat Malik ji of INA had unfurled the Flag. During Amrit Mahotsav, on the 14th of April, the Tricolour was once again hoisted at that very Moirang. Innumerable such freedom fighters and great men are being remembered by the country during Amrit Mahotsav.Programmes in that connection are being successively organized by the government and social organisations. A similar event is about to take place on the 15th of August this time…this is an endeavour connected with the National Anthem. It’s an effort on part of the Ministry of Culture to have maximum number of Indians sing the National Anthem together. For this, a website too has been created – Rashtragan.in. With the help of this website, you can render the National Anthem and record it, thereby getting connected with the campaign. I hope you connect yourselves with this novel initiative. In the days to come, you will get to see many such campaigns and efforts. Amrit Mahotsav is not a programme of any government; neither a programme of any political party…it is a programme of crores and crores of Indians…a bow to our freedom fighters by every independent and grateful Indian. And the extension of the basic sentiment behind this festival is immense…the spirit entails treading the path of our freedom fighters…building a country of their dreams. Just the way champion proponents of Freedom had joined hands for the cause, we have to come together for the development of the country. We have to live for the country, work for the country…and in that, even the smallest of efforts too produce big results. We can contribute to nation building even while performing our routine chores…such as ‘Vocal for Local’. Supporting local entrepreneurs, artists, craftsmen, weavers should come naturally to us. The National Handloom Day on the 7th of August is an occasion when we can strive to attempt that. National Handloom Day has a remarkable historic background. On this very day in 1905, the Swadeshi Andolan had begun.
Friends, in the rural and tribal regions of our country, handloom is a major source of income. This is a sector that comprises lakhs of women, weavers and craftsmen. Even small efforts on your part will give rise to a new hope in weavers. Do purchase something or the other and share your thought with others as well…now that we are celebrating 75 years of Independence, it of course becomes our responsibility. You must have noticed that year 2014 onwards, we often touch upon Khadi in Mann ki Baat. It is only on account of your efforts that today, the sale of Khadi has risen manifold. Could anyone even think that in any Khadi store, the sales figure would cross one crore rupees…But you have made that possible too. Whenever, wherever you purchase a Khadi product, it does benefit our poor weaver brothers and sisters. That is why, in a way, buying Khadi is service to people, service to the country. I urge you my dear brothers and sisters, to make it a point to definitely buy Handloom products being made in rural areas and share it on #MyHandloomMyPride.
Friends, when one refers to the freedom movement and Khadi, remembering revered Bapu is but natural. Just the way the Quit India Movement, Bharat Chhoro Andolan steered under Bapu’s leadership, every countryman today has to lead a Bharat Jodo Andolan. It is our duty to ensure that our work helps closely knit, bind our India which is filled with diversity. Come, on Amrit Mahotsav, let us make a sacred Amrit resolve that the country remains to be our highest faith; our topmost priority. We have to move forward with the mantra ‘Nation First, Always First’.
My dear countrymen, today I wish to express my special thanks to my young friends tuned in to Mann ki Baat. Just a few days ago, on part of MyGov, a study was conducted regarding the listeners of Mann ki Baat. In this study, primarily, people who send messages and suggestions were focused upon. The study revealed the fact that out of those sending messages and suggestions, close to 75% are below the age of 35…meaning thereby that the suggestions of the youth power of India are steering Mann ki Baat. I view this as a very good indicator. Mann Ki Baat is a medium which has positivity, sensitivity. In Mann Ki Baat, we talk about positive things; its character is collective.
This activism for positive thoughts and suggestions in the youth delights me. I am happy also about the opportunity that I get through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to know of the minds of the youth.
Friends, suggestions received from you are the real strength of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. It is your suggestions, through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, that express the diversity of India, spread the fragrance of service and sacrifice of Indians in all the four directions, inspire one and all through the innovation of our toiling youth. You send ideas of various kinds in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. We are not able to discuss all of them, but I do send many of them to related departments so that further work can be done on them.
Friends, I want to tell you about the efforts of Saayee Praneeth ji. Saayee Praneeth ji is a Software Engineer, hailing from Andhra Paradesh. Last year he saw that in his area farmers had to suffer a lot due to the vagaries of weather. For years he had interest in meteorology. So, he decided to use his interest and talent for the welfare of farmers. Now he purchases weather data from different data sources, analyses them and sends necessary information through various media to farmers in local language. Besides weather updates, Praneeth ji also gives guidance to people about what they should do in different climatic conditions… Especially how to be safe from floods or how to avoid storm or lightning, he talks about this too.
Friends, on the one hand this effort of a young software engineer touches our hearts; on the other the use of technology by one of our friends will amaze us. This friend Shriman Isaak Munda ji hails from a village in Sambalpur district of Odisha. Isaak ji once used to work as a daily wager but now he has become an internet sensation. He is earning a lot through his YouTube Channel. In his videos he shows prominently the local dishes, traditional ways of cooking, his village, his lifestyle, family and food habits. His journey as a YouTuber began in March 2020 when he posted a video related to Pakhal, the famous local dish of Odisha. Since then, he has posted hundreds of videos. This effort of his is different for many reasons. Specially because through this, people living in cities get a chance to watch the lifestyle about which they don’t know much. Isaak Munda ji is celebrating by blending culture and cuisine equally and inspiring us too.
Friends, while we are discussing technology I want to discuss of an interesting subject. Recently you must have read, seen that a start-up established by an alumni of IIT Madras has made a 3D printed house. The construction of the house through 3D printing, how did this happen after all? Actually, this start-up first of all fed a 3 Dimensional design in a 3 D printer and then through a concrete of a special kind fabricated a 3 D structure layer by layer. You will be happy to know that many experiments of this kind are being done throughout the country. There was a time when it would take years to complete even a minor construction. But today due to technology the situation is changing in India. Some time ago we had launched a Global Housing Technology Challenge to invite such innovative companies from all over the world. This is a unique attempt of its kind in the country; hence we gave it the name Light House Projects. For now, work on Light House Projects is on at a fast pace at 6 different locations in the country. Modern technology and innovative methods are used in these Light House Projects. This reduces the duration of construction. Along with that, the houses that are constructed are more durable, economical and comfortable. Recently, through drones, I also reviewed these projects and saw live their work progress.
In the project at Indore, Pre-Fabricated Sandwich Panel System is being used in place of Brick-and-Mortar Walls. In Rajkot, the Light House is being made with French Technology in which through a tunnel Monolithic Concrete construction technology is being used. Houses made with this technology will be lot more capable of withstanding disasters. In Chennai, the Pre-cast Concrete system technologies form America and Finland are being used. By this, houses will get built faster and the cost too will be low. In Ranchi houses will be built using the 3D Construction System of Germany. In this, every room will be constructed separately and then the entire structure will be joined together the way block toys are joined. In Agartala, using technology from New Zealand, houses that can withstand major earthquakes are being made with steel frame. Meanwhile, in Lucknow technology from Canada is being used. In this plaster and paint will not be required and walls prepared in advance will be used to build houses faster.
Friends, today an attempt is being made in the country to ensure that these projects work as Incubation centers. Through this our planners, Architects, Engineers and students will know of new technology and experiment with them too. I am sharing these things especially with our youth so that in the interest of the nation they are encouraged towards technology in newer fields.
My dear countrymen, you must have heard of an English adage- “To learn is to grow” that is to learn is to progress. When we learn something new, doors to new advances open up automatically for us. Whenever effort to do something new, different from the rut, has been made, new doors have opened for humankind, a new era has begun. And you must have seen whenever something new happens anywhere, its result surprises everyone. Now, for example, if I ask you which the states that you would connect with Apples are? Obviously in your mind first of all the name of Himachal Pradesh, Jammu-Kashmir and Uttarakhand would strike. But if I ask you to add the name of Manipur too to this list you will probably be filled with surprise. Youths filled with passion to do something new have demonstrated this feat in Manipur. Nowadays apple farming is picking up fast in the Ukhrul district of Manipur. Farmers here are growing apples in their orchards. To learn apple farming these people have taken formal training by going to Himachal. One of these is T S Ringphami Young. By profession he is an aeronautical engineer. He along with his wife Shrimati T S Angel has grown apples. Similarly, Avungshee Shimre Augasteena too has grown apples in her orchard. Avungshee had a job in Delhi. She returned to her village quitting this and started farming apple. There are many such apple growers in Manipur who have demonstrated something different and something new.
Friends, in our tribal communities, Ber fruit has always been very popular. The members of the tribal community have always been cultivating Ber. But its cultivation is increasing especially after the COVID-19 pandemic. Bikramjit Chakma of 32 years of age is my young friend from Unakoti, Tripura. He has not only earned a lot of profit by starting the Ber cultivation; Now he is also motivating people to do Ber cultivation. The state government has also come forward to help such people. Many special nurseries have been started by the government for this purpose so that the demand of the people associated with the cultivation of Ber can be met. Innovation is happening in agriculture, so creativity is also being witnessed in the by-products of agriculture.
Friends, I have also come to know about an attempt made in LakhimpurKheri in Uttar Pradesh. A unique initiative has taken place in LakhimpurKheri during the period of COVID itself. Here, the work of training women to manufacture fibre from the waste banana stems was started. The way to make the best out of the waste. Banana fibre is prepared by cutting the stem of a banana with the help of a machine, the fibre is like jute or flax. Handbags, mats, rugs, many things are made from this fibre. Through this, the utilization of crop waste started, on the other hand our sisters and daughters living in the village acquired another source of income. Through this work of Banana fibre, a woman from the area earns four to six hundred rupees per day. Banana is cultivated on hundreds of acres of land in Lakhimpur Kheri. After the harvesting of banana, the farmers usually had to spend a separate sum to dispose of its stem. Now not only their money is being saved; and lending credence to the saying of ‘Getting two of something, for the price of one!’
Friends, on the one hand products are being manufactured from banana fibre; on the other, delicious dishes like dosa and gulabjamun are also being made from banana flour. Women in Uttara Kannada and Dakshina Kannada districts of Karnataka are doing this unique work. This endeavour also began in the Corona period itself. These women not only prepared things like dosa, gulabjamun from banana flour; they also shared their pictures on social media. When more people came to know about the banana flour, its demand also increased and so did the income of these women. Like Lakhimpur Kheri, here too, women are leading this innovative idea.
Friends, such examples become the inspiration to do something new in life. There must be many such people around you too. When your family is involved in close conversations, you should also make these a part of your chat. Take out some time and go to see such efforts with children and if you get the opportunity, do something like this yourself. And yes, I would like it if you share all this with me on Namo App or MyGov.
My dear countrymen, there is a verse in our Sanskrit texts –
आत्मार्थम् जीव लोके अस्मिन्, को न जीवति मानवः |
परम् परोपकारार्थम्, यो जीवति स जीवति ||
Atmantharmjeevalokeasmin, ko na jeevtimanavah.
Paramparopkarathram, yojeevatisajeevati ||
That is, everyone in this world lives for himself. But in actuality only the person who exists for the sake of others really lives. Talking about the philanthropic efforts of the sons and daughters of Mother India is what ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is all about. Today also, we’ll talk about some of these friends. One of our friends hails from Chandigarh city. I too, have lived in Chandigarh for a few years. It is a very cheerful and beautiful city. The people of Chandigarh are also large hearted and yes, if you are a foodie, you will have more fun here. In Sector 29 of Chandigarh, Sanjay Rana ji runs a food stall and sells Chole-Bhature on his cycle. One day his daughter Riddhima and niece Riya came to him with an idea. Both requested him to feed chole-bhature for free to those who had got the COVID Vaccine. He happily agreed to the suggestion and immediately started this good and noble effort. To eat Sanjay Rana ji’schole-bhature for free, you have to show that you have got the vaccine administered on the very day. As soon as you show the vaccination message he will give you delicious Chole-Bhature. It is said that for the welfare of the society, spirit of service and duty are required more than money. Our Sanjay Bhai is proving this saying to be right.
Friends, I would like to discuss another such work today. This effort is being attempted in Nilgiri of Tamil Nadu. Here Radhika Shastriji has started the AmbuRx (Amburex) Project. The purpose of this project is to provide easy transport for the treatment of patients in hilly areas. Radhika runs a cafe in Coonoor. She raised funds for AmbuRx from her cafe colleagues. Today six AmbuRx are serving in the Nilgiri hills and are coming to the aid of patients in remote parts during the time of emergency. An AmbuRx is equipped with a Stretcher, Oxygen Cylinder, First Aid Box and other things
Friends, whether it is Sanjay ji or Radhika ji, their examples demonstrate that we can render service while doing our routine work, our business or job.
Friends, a few days back a very interesting and very emotional event occurred, which imparted new strength to India-Georgia friendship. In this ceremony, India handed over the Holy Relic or icon of Saint Queen Ketevan to the Government of Georgia and the people there, for this mission our Foreign Minister himself went there. The ceremony, which took place in a very emotionally charged atmosphere, was attended by the President of Georgia, the Prime Minister, many religious leaders, and a large number of Georgians. The words that were said in praise of India in this ceremony are indeed very memorable. This single ceremony has not only strengthened the relations between the two nations but as well as between Goa and Georgia. This is because these holy relics of Saint Queen Ketevan were found in 2005 from Saint Augustine Church in Goa.
Friends, the question arising in your mind must be…what is this matter all about and when and how did this happen? Actually, this is an incident about four to five hundred years ago. Queen Ketevan was the daughter of the royal family of Georgia. In 1624 after ten years of imprisonment she was martyred. According to an ancient Portuguese document, the mortal remains of Saint Queen Ketevan were kept in the Saint Augustine Convent of Old Goa. But, for a long time it was believed that her remains buried in Goa were lost in the earthquake of 1930.
After decades of tireless efforts by the Indian government and Georgia’s historians, researchers, archaeologists and the Georgian Church, the relics were successfully discovered in 2005. This is an extremely emotional topic for the people of Georgia. That is why keeping in mind their historical, religious and spiritual sentiments, the Government of India decided to gift a part of these relics to the people of Georgia. Today, I would like to thank the people of Goa for preserving this unique side of the shared history of India and Georgia. Goa has been the land of many a great spiritual heritage. Saint Augustine Church is a UNESCO’s World Heritage Site – a part of the Churches and Convents of Goa.
My dear countrymen, let me now take you straight from Georgia to Singapore, where another glorious opportunity arose earlier this month. The Prime Minister of Singapore and my friend, Lee Hsien Loong inaugurated the recently renovated Silat Road Gurudwara. He also wore the traditional Sikh turban. This Gurudwara was built about a hundred years ago and there is also a memorial dedicated to Bhai Maharaj Singh. Bhai Maharaj Singh ji fought for the independence of India and this moment becomes more inspiring when we are celebrating 75 years of independence. The people to people strength between two countries gets a boost with such initiatives and efforts. These also show how important it is to live in a harmonious environment and understand each other’s culture.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have discussed many topics. There is another subject which is very close to my heart. It is the topic of water conservation. The place where I spent my childhood, there was always shortage of water. We used to yearn for rain and thus saving every drop of water has been a part of our traditions, our sanskar. Now this mantra of “Water conservation through public participation” has changed the picture there. Saving every drop of water, preventing any kind of wastage of water… it should become a natural part of our lifestyle. Such a tradition should be made in our families, which would make every member proud.
Friends, the protection of nature and environment is embedded in the cultural life of India, in our daily lives. At the same time, rains and the monsoon have always shaped our thoughts, our philosophy and our civilization. In ‘Ritusanhar’ and ‘Meghdoot’, the great poet Kalidas has beautifully described the rains. These poems are still very popular among literature lovers.The magnificence of rains is also beautifully described in the Parjanya Suktam of Rigveda. Similarly, the relationship between the earth, the sun and the rain has been elaborated in a poetic form in the Srimad Bhagavata.
अष्टौ मासान् निपीतं यद्, भूम्याः च, ओद-मयम् वसु |
स्वगोभिः मोक्तुम् आरेभे, पर्जन्यः काल आगते ||
That is, the Sun has exploited the earth’s wealth in the form of water for eight months, now in the monsoon season, the Sun is returning this accumulated wealth to the earth. Indeed, the monsoon and rainy season is not only beautiful and pleasant, but it is also nurturing, life-giving. The rain water that we are getting is for our future generations, we should never forget that.
Today a thought came to my mind that why not end my talk with such interesting references. My very best wishes to all of you for the forthcoming festivals. At the time of festivals and celebrations, you must remember that Corona has not yet gone from amongst us. You must not forget the protocols related to Corona. May all of you be healthy and happy.
Many many thanks!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
All of us know that today is the birth anniversary of Major Dhyanchand ji. And our country celebrates it as National Sports Day, in commemoration. A thought struck me, that perhaps, wherever Major Dhyanchand ji’s soul must be at the moment, it must be feeling overjoyed…since it was Dhyanchand ji’s hockey that brought glory to Indian hockey in the whole world. And four decades later, almost after 41 years, the youth of India, her sons and daughters, once again infused vitality in our hockey. And irrespective of the number of medals won, no citizen of India enjoys victory until a medal is won in hockey. And this time, in the Olympics, the medal that was won for hockey came our way after four decades. You can imagine…wherever Major Dhyanchand ji might be…his heart, his soul must be overflowing with joy. And the entire life of Dhyanchand ji was dedicated to Sports…and that is why today, when the youth of the country, our sons and daughters are visibly drawn towards sports, with even parents experiencing happiness on children coming forward in sports; this eagerness that one can see all over…I feel that itself is a great tribute to Major Dhyanchand ji.
Friends,
whenever the subject of Sports and Games is touched upon, the entire young generation comes into view; naturally so. And when we cast a keen glance at the young generation, we notice a sweeping change there. The mind of the youth has undergone a transformation. And today’s young minds, shunning obsolete, age old methods and patterns, want to do something new altogether; something different. Today’s young mind does not want to tread ready made beaten paths; it wants to carve out newer paths. It wants to step on unknown territory. New destinations, new goals as well, new roads, new aspirations as well! And once a young person decides in the mind, no stone is left unturned in the pursuit…persevering day and night. We see how, some time ago, when India opened her Space Sector…within no time the young generation lapped up the opportunity. And to avail of its benefits, college students and young people working in Universities and the private sector enthusiastically came forward. And I firmly believe that in the coming days, a large number of satellites would be of those developed by our youth, our students, our colleges, our universities, students working in labs.
Similarly, wherever you see…go to any family…however well to do, however educated the family might be…if you speak to a young person in the family, she or he, moving away from family traditions, express the wish to do a start up or join a start up…excitedly willing to take a risk. Today, the startup culture is expanding even to smaller cities and I am seeing it as an indication of a bright future. Just a few days ago, toys in our country were being discussed. Within no time, when this caught the attention of our youth, they too resolutely decided to work towards positioning Indian toys in the world with a distinct identity. And they are trying out ever new experiments. The world is a huge market for toys…a market of 6 to 7 lakh crores. Today India’s share is miniscule. But, how to craft toys, what diversity to be lent to toys, what technology to be used, how toys should be, compatible with child psychology…these are points where the youth of the country is applying minds to…wishing to contribute something. Friends, there’s one more thing that fills the heart with joy and further strengthens the belief. And what is that…have you ever marked? Generally, what had crept into our fabric was acceptance of mediocrity…”It happens”, “It’s okay – this will do”! But now I’m noticing my country’s young minds focusing themselves on excellence. They want to do the best, using the best methods. This too will emerge as a major force for the nation.
Friends,
this time, the Olympics have created a major impact. The events at the Olympics are over; the Paralympics are going on. Whatever our country earned in this world of Sports may be little in comparison with the world, but enough has happened to bolster our belief. Today, it is not that the youth is just watching sports…the youth is also looking at possibilities associated with Sports…observing the entire eco system minutely…comprehending its potential, wishing to connect with it in some way or the other. She or he now wants to surpass conventional ways and adopt new disciplines. And my dear countrymen, now that such a momentum has been built up…Sports has begun to be discussed in every family…do tell me…should this momentum be allowed to subside, to halt now? No…not at all. Even you must be thinking on the similar lines. In the country now, Sports and Games, sportsman spirit is not to stop. In family life, in social life, in the life of the Nation, this momentum has to be accorded permanence…infusing it with energy…replenishing it with relentless new energy. At home or elsewhere, in villages or cities, our playgrounds must be filled up. Let all play – let all bloom! And I’m sure you remember what I had said from Red Fort, “Sabka Prayas”…Yes…collective endeavour. It is only through collective endeavour of all that India will attain glorious heights in Sports that she rightfully deserves. On the course charted by people such as Major Dhyanchand ji we have to move forward…it’s our responsibility. After years has the country witnessed a period where, in families, in society, in States, in the Nation, all the people are single mindedly forging a bond with Sports.
My dear young friends, taking advantage of this opportunity, we must garner expertise in a variety of sports. In villages as well, sports competitions should be held successively. It is only through competition that a sport evolves…progresses…giving rise to sportspersons as an outcome. Come, let all us countrymen strive to further this momentum as much as we can…contributing whatever we can…let us transform the mantra of ‘Sabka Prayas’ into reality.
My dear countrymen,
tomorrow also happens to be the grand festival of Janmashtmi. This festival of Janmashtami, that is the festival of birth of Bhagwan Shri Krishna. We are familiar with all the forms of Bhagwan, from naughty Kanhaiya to the one taking Colossal form Krishna, from the one well versed in scriptures to one skilled in weaponary. Be it art, beauty, charm, where all isn’t Krishna there! But I am saying all this because a few days before Jamashtami I had gone through an interesting experience. So I felt I should talk about this to you. You must be aware that on the 20th of this month the construction work related to Bhagwan Somnath temple has been dedicated to the people. 3-4 kilometers away from Somnath temple is the Bhalka Teerth, this Bhalka Teerth is the place where Bhagwan Shri Krishna spent his last moments on earth. In a way his Leelas, divine acts in this world culminated there. Many works for the development of that entire region are being done by the Somnath Trust. I was thinking of Bhalaka Teerth and the works going on there when I noticed a beautiful art-book. Someone had left this book for me outside my residence. In this there were many forms and many magnificent pictures of Bhagwan Shri Krishna. Pictures were very attractive and very meaningful. My curiosity grew all the more when I started turning the pages of the book. When I saw the book and all the pictures and the message for me written there, I felt l should meet the one who had left it for me. I should meet the one who has left the book outside my home. So my office contacted the person. Such was my curiosity on seeing the art-book, on seeing the different forms of Bhagwan Shri Krishna that I called the person to meet the very next day. With this curiosity I met Jaduarani Dasi ji. She is American, was born in America, brought up in America, Jadurani Dasi ji is connected to ISKCON, connected to Harey Krishna movement and one of her major specialities is that she is skilled in Bhakti Arts. You know that just after two days, on the 1st of September, we have the 125th birth anniversary of the founder of ISKCON Shri Prabhupaad Swami ji. Jadurani Dasi ji had come to India in this very connection. The question before me was that one who was born in America, who had been so far away from the Indian ethos; how could she make such attractive pictures of Bhagwan Shir Krishna! I had a long chat with her, but I want you to listen to some parts of it.
PM sir : Jadurani Ji, Hare Krishna!
I have read a little about Bhakti Art but tell our listeners more about it. Your passion and interest towards it is great.
Jadurani Ji : So, bhakti art we have one article in the bhakti art illuminations which explains how this art is not coming from the mind or imagination but it is from the ancient Vedic scriptures like Bhram Sanhita. Ven Omkaraya Patitam skilatam Sikand (वें ओंकाराय पतितं स्क्लितं सिकंद), from The Goswami’s of Vrindavan, from the Lord Brahma himself. Eeshwarah paramah krishnah sachchidanand vigrahah ( ईश्वर: परम: कृष्ण: सच्चिदानन्द विग्रह: ) how He carries the flute, how all of his senses can act for any other sense and Srimad bhagwatam (TCR 9.09) (Barhapeend natwarvapuh karnayoh karnakaram ) बर्हापींड नटवरवपुः कर्णयो: कर्णिकारं everything, He wears a karnika flower on his ear, He makes the impression of His Lotus feet all over the land of Vrindavan, the cow herds voicing of his Glories, His flute attracts the hearts and minds of all fortunate beings. So everything is from ancient Vedic scriptures and the power of these scriptures which are coming from transcendental personalities and the pure devotees who are bringing it the art has their power and that’s why its transformational, it is not my power at all.
PM Sir: Jadurani ji, I have different type of question for you. Since 1966 in a way and from 1976 physically you have been associated with India for long, will you please tell me what does India mean to you?
Jadurani Ji: Prime minister ji, India means everything to me. I was mentioning I think to Hon’ble President a few days ago that India has come up so much in technical advancement and following the west very well with Twitter and Instagram and iPhones and Big buildings and so much facility but I know that, that’s not the real glory of India. What makes India glorious is the fact that Krishna himself the avatari appeared here and all the avatars appeared here, Lord Shiva appeared here, Lord Ram appeared here, all the holy rivers are here, all the holy places of Vaishnav culture are here and so India especially Vrindavan is the most important place in the universe, Vrindavan is the source of all the Vaikunth planets, the source of Dwarika, the source of the whole material creation, so I love India.
PM Sir: Thank You Jadurani Ji. Hare Krishna!,
Friends,
when the people of the world pay heed to Indian spiritual systems and philosophy today, then we also have a responsibility to carry forward these great traditions. That which has perished has to be left behind, but that which is timeless has to be carried forward. Let us celebrate our festivals, understand its scientific meaning, and the connotation behind it. Not only this, there is an underlying message in every festival; there is a Sanskar as well. We not only have to know it, live it and pass it on as a legacy for generations to come. I once again wish all the countrymen a very Happy Janmashtami.
My dear countrymen,
during this Corona period, the myriad aspects of cleanliness that I should have touched upon; I feel, perhaps, that it saw a decrease. I also feel that we should not let the cleanliness campaign diminish even at the slightest. The examples of how efforts by everyone for nation building in turn lead to progress for all of us, also inspire us and infuse us with a new energy to do something, impart new confidence, give a meaning to our resolve. We know very well that whenever the topic Swachh Bharat Abhiyan comes up, the name of Indore also arises because Indore has created a special identity of its own in relation to cleanliness and the people of Indore are also entitled to felicitations. Our Indore has remained at number one in ‘Swachh Bharat Ranking’ for many years. Now the people of Indore do not want to sit satisfied with this ranking of Swachh Bharat, they want to move forward, want to do something new. And now they have decided to maintain a ‘Water Plus City’ and are striving for it with all their might.
‘Water Plus City’ means a city where no sewage is dumped into any public water source without treatment. The citizens here themselves have come forward and connected their drains with the sewer line. A Cleanliness campaign has also been started and due to this the polluted water draining in the Saraswati and Kanh rivers has also reduced considerably and an improvement is visible. Today, when our country is celebrating the Amrit Mahotsav of Independence, we have to remember that we should never let the resolve of the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan diminish. The greater the number of cities which are ‘Water Plus City’ in our country, cleanliness will increase further, our rivers will also become clean and we will be fulfilling values associated with humane responsibility of conserving water.
Friends,
before me is an example that has come from Madhubani in Bihar. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Agricultural University in Madhubani and the local Krishi Vigyan Kendra have jointly made a worthy effort. Not only farmers are accruing benefit from this scheme but it has also imparted renewed vigour to the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. The name of this initiative of the university is – “Sukhet Model” The purpose of the Sukhet model is to reduce pollution in the villages. Under this model, dung and other household waste is collected from the farmers of the village and in return the villagers are given money for cooking gas cylinders. The work of making vermicompost from the disposed garbage collected from the village is also ongoing. Therefore, there are four benefits of the Sukhet model that are directly visible. One, the village is freed from pollution; the second is that the village is freed from filth, the third is that the money for the LPG cylinder goes to the villagers and the fourth is that the farmers of the village get bio- fertilizer. You must give it a thought as to how such efforts can increase the power of our villages. This is the basis of self-reliance. I appeal that every panchayat of the country should also think of doing something like this in their respective villages. And friends, when we set out with a goal, it is certain that we achieve the results. Now look at our Kanjirangal Panchayat of Sivaganga district in Tamil Nadu. See what this small panchayat has done, here you will get to see another model of wealth from the Waste. Here the Gram Panchayat along with the local people has started an indigenous project to generate electricity from waste in their village.The garbage is collected from the entire village, electricity is generated from it and the residual products are also sold as pesticides. The capacity of this village power plant is to dispose of two tonnes of waste per day. The electricity generated from this power plant is utilized for streetlights and other needs of the village. The money saved by the Panchayat through this scheme is being used for other developmental works. Now tell me, a small panchayat in Sivaganga district of Tamil Nadu inspires all of us countrymen to do something or not? They have achieved wonders, haven’t they?
My dear countrymen,
‘Mann Ki Baat’ is no longer confined to the borders of India. There is a discussion on ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in different corners of the world too. And there are people from our Indian community living abroad, who keep providing me with much new information. And I also like to sometimes share with you the unique programs that are going on abroad in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Even today I will introduce you to some such people, but before that I want to play an audio for you. Listen carefully.
##
[रेडियो युनिटी नाईन्टी एफ्.एम्.-2]
नमोनमः सर्वेभ्यः | मम नाम गङ्गा | भवन्तः शृण्वन्तु रेडियो-युनिटी-नवति-
एफ्.एम् –‘एकभारतं श्रेष्ठ-भारतम्’ | अहम् एकतामूर्तेः मार्गदर्शिका एवं रेडियो-
युनिटी-माध्यमे आर्.जे. अस्मि | अद्य संस्कृतदिनम् अस्ति | सर्वेभ्यः बहव्यः
शुभकामनाः सन्ति| सरदार-वल्लभभाई-पटेलमहोदयः ‘लौहपुरुषः’ इत्युच्यते | २०१३-
तमे वर्षे लौहसंग्रहस्य अभियानम् प्रारब्धम् | १३४-टन-परिमितस्य लौहस्य गलनं
कृतम् | झारखण्डस्य एकः कृषकः मुद्गरस्य दानं कृतवान् | भवन्तः
शृण्वन्तु रेडियो-युनिटी-नवति-एफ्.एम् –‘एकभारतं श्रेष्ठ-भारतम्’ |
[रेडियो युनिटी नाईन्टी एफ्.एम्.-2]
##
Friends,
you must have understood the language. This was Sanskrit being spoken on the radio and the one speaking was RJ Ganga. RJ Ganga is a member of a group of Radio Jockeys in Gujarat. Her other companions are RJ Neelam, RJ Guru and RJ Hetal. All of them together in Gujarat, in Kevadiya are currently engaged in enhancing respect for the Sanskrit language. And you also know that this is the same Kevadiya where the world’s tallest statue, the pride of our country, the Statue of Unity is located, that is the very Kevadiya I am talking about. And the radio jockeys are such that they wear multiple hats simultaneously. They also serve as guides, and also run the Community Radio Initiative, Radio Unity 90 FM. These RJs talk to their listeners in Sanskrit language, providing them with information in Sanskrit.
Friends, in these parts, it is said about Sanskrit
अमृतम् संस्कृतम् मित्र, सरसम् सरलम् वचः |
एकता मूलकम् राष्ट्रे, ज्ञान विज्ञान पोषकम् |
That is, our Sanskrit language is sweet and also simple.
Through its thoughts and medium of literary texts, Sanskrit helps nurture knowledge and also national unity, strengthens it. Sanskrit literature comprises the divine philosophy of humanity and knowledge which can captivate anyone’s attention. Recently, I got to know about many such people who are engaged in the inspirational work of teaching Sanskrit in foreign lands. One such person is Mr. Rutger Kortenhorst, a well-known Sanskrit scholar and teacher in Ireland who teaches Sanskrit to the children there. Sanskrit language also plays an important role in the strengthening of cultural relations between India and Ireland and between India and Thailand here in the east. Dr. Chirapat Prapandavidya and Dr. Kusuma Rakshamani, both of them are playing a very important role in the promotion of Sanskrit language in Thailand. They have also carried out comparative studies in literature of Thai and Sanskrit languages. Another such professor is Shriman Boris Zakharin, who teaches Sanskrit at Moscow State University in Russia. He has published many research papers and books. He has also translated many books from Sanskrit to Russian. Likewise,Sydney Sanskrit School is one of Australia’s premier institutions, where Sanskrit language is taught to the students. For children, these schools also organize programs like Sanskrit Grammar Camp, Sanskrit Plays and Sanskrit Day.
Friends,
the efforts which have been made in recent times have brought a new awareness about Sanskrit.Now is the time to increase our efforts in this direction. It is our collective duty to cherish our heritage, preserve it, pass it on to the new generation…. and future generations also have a right to it. Now is the time to increase everyone’s efforts for these works as well. Friends, if you know of any such person engaged in this kind of effort, if you have any such information, then please share the information related to them on social media with the hashtag Celebrating Sanskrit.
My dear countrymen,
in the next few days ‘Vishwakarma Jayanti’ will also be celebrated. Here, Bhagwan Vishwakarma is considered as a symbol of the creative power behind the genesis of the world. Whoever through their skill, builds an object..innovates… whether it is sewing-embroidery, software or satellite, all this is a manifestation of Bhagwan Vishwakarma. Even though skill is being recognized in a new way in the world today, our sages and seers have emphasized on skill and scale for thousands of years. They have interlinked skill, talent, ability with faith, thereby making it a part of the philosophy of our lives. Our Vedas have also dedicated many sookta to Bhagwan Vishwakarma. Whichever great creations are there, whatever new and big works have been done, our scriptures ascribe them to Bhagwan Vishwakarma. It is in a way a symbol of the thought that whatever development and innovation is happening in the world
happens only through skills.This is the very sentiment behind the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Vishwakarma and his worship. And this has been quoted in our scriptures too :
‘विश्वम कृत्-सन्म कर्म व्यापारो यस्य सः विश्वकर्मा’
Meaning, the one who takes all efforts in the process of creating and building is a Vishwakarma. In the view of our scriptures, all the skilled, talented people around us engaged in the process of creation and building are the legacy of Bhagwan Vishwakarma. Our lives without such individuals would be unfathomable.Think about it, if there is some problem with electricity in your house and you cannot find an electrician, how will it be? You will have to face a big hurdle! Our life goes on because of many such skilled people. Look around yourself; be it an ironsmith, a potter, a carpenter, an electrician, a house painter, a sanitation worker, or someone who repairs mobile-laptops. All of them are known only because of their skill. In modern form, all of them are also Vishwakarma. But friends, there is another aspect to it and it also sometimes causes concern. The situation in our country where culture, tradition, thinking, skill, manpower have been interlinked with Bhagwan Vishwakarma and how it has changed…. once upon a time, Kaushalya, our innate skills had a huge impact on our family life, social life and life of the natio. But during the long period of slavery and subjugation, the feeling that gave such respect to skill gradually faded into oblivion. The thinking became such that skill based tasks were considered inferior. And now see, today, the whole world is emphasizing the most on skill. The worship of Bhagwan Vishwakarma is also not to be completed only with formalities. We have to respect the talent, we have to work hard to be skilled. We should be proud to be skilled. When we do something new, innovate something, create something that will benefit the society, make people’s life easier, then our Vishwakarma Puja will be meaningful. There is no dearth of opportunities for skilled people in the world today. Skills are forging multiple paths of progress. Come, this time let us take a pledge to follow the message of Bhagwan Vishwakarma along with faith in his worship. The spirit of our worship should be such that we understand the importance of skill, and also give full respect to skilled people, no matter what work they do.
This is the time of the 75th year of our Independence. This year we have to make new resolutions every day, think new, and bolster our spirit to do something new. When India completes one hundred years of Independence, then only these resolutions of ours will be seen in the foundation of its successes. So, we should not let this opportunity pass. We have to contribute our maximum in this. And in the midst of all these efforts, we have one more thing to remember. दवाई भी, कड़ाई भी…vaccinate and take precautions. More than 62 crore vaccine doses have been administered in the country, but still we have to be careful, be vigilant. And yes, as always, whenever you do something new, think new, then definitely include me in that. I will be waiting for your letter and messages. With this wish, once again many felicitations to all of you for the upcoming festivals.
Thank you very much.
Namaskar!
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. You are aware that for an important programme, I have to leave for America…hence I thought it would be apt to record Mann Ki Baat, prior to my departure to America. The day of Mann Ki Baat this September is important on another count, date wise. Routinely, we do remember a lot of days; we even celebrate myriad Days…and if you ask young sons-daughters at home, they are likely to furnish out an entire list of Days of the year with their chronological relevance! But, there is one more day that all of us must remember; this day is one that is immensely congruent to the traditions of India. It’s one that connects us with our traditions that we have been following for centuries. That is – World Rivers Day.
It has been articulated here – Pibanti Naddhah, Swayameva Naambha…meaning that rivers do not drink their own water…they give it away altruistically. For us, rivers are not mere physical entities; for us a river is a living unit…and that is exactly why we refer to rivers as Mother! Numerous festivals, festive occasions, functions of ours, occasions to rejoice take place in the very laps of these mothers.
All of you are aware – with the advent of the month of Magh, in our country, a lot of people perform Kalpvaas on the banks of mother Ganga or other rivers for an entire month. This tradition has ceased now…but in earlier times, it was customary to remember rivers while bathing at home. This tradition of remembering rivers may have gone extinct or exists sparsely…but there used to be a great tradition that would take one on a tour across the vastness of India while bathing early morning…a cerebral pilgrimage! It used to be a source of inspiration to connect with every nook and corner of the country. And of course, in India, it has been customary to chant a Shlok while bathing:
Gange cha yamune chaiva Godavari saraswati
Narmade Sindhu Kaveri Jale asmin sannidhim kuru
Earlier, at our homes, the elderly in the family would make children memorise the Shlok …this also led to germinating Aastha, faith towards rivers in our country. It would inscribe an illustrated map of the great land of India on the psyche. That used to establish an emotional connect with rivers. It would result in nurturing a harmonious credence towards the very river that embodied the Mother, sentimentally as well as visually…as a way of life too! It was a way to instill ‘Sanskaar’; the value system gamut.
Friends,
now that we are discussing the significance of rivers in our country, it is but natural for everyone to raise a question…one, in fact, has the right to do so…and answering that question is our responsibility too! Anyone can question – “you are singing so many songs dedicated to rivers, referring to a river as a Mother…then why is it that the river gets polluted? Our scriptures distinctly disapprove of polluting rivers, even a bit! And our traditions have been synchronous with the thought. You know, of course, that the western region of our India, especially Gujarat and Rajasthan, suffer from scarcity of water. They face famines, many a time. Now that is why, a new tradition has developed in the social life there. For example, when it starts raining in Gujarat, Jal-Jeelani Ekadashi is celebrated there. This means, it is synonymous with what we term as ‘Catch the Rain’ in today’s times…accumulating each and every drop of water…Jal-jeelani. On similar lines, after the rains, in Bihar and other regions of the East, the great festival of Chhatth is celebrated. I hope that keeping the Chatth Pooja in mind, preparations for cleaning and repairing riverbanks and Ghats would have commenced. We can very well undertake the endeavour of cleaning rivers and freeing them of pollution with collective effort and support. The Namami Gange Mission too is making advances today…collective efforts of all, in a way, mass awareness; a mass movement has a major role to play in that.
Friends,
when one is referring to the river; when Mother Ganga is being talked about, one is tempted to draw your attention to another aspect. When Namami Gange is being referred to, one thing is certain to draw your attention…especially that of the youth. These days, a special E-auction is being held. This electronic auction pertains to gifts presented to me by people from time to time. The money that accrues through this E-auction is dedicated solely to the Namami Gange Campaign. The affectionate, warm spirit, with which you present me gifts …that very sentiment gets bolstered through this campaign.
Friends,
in order to rejuvenate rivers throughout the country; in order to cleanse waters, the government and social service organizations keep undertaking one endeavour or the other. And this is not about the present day; it is going on for decades now. There are some people who have dedicated themselves to these causes. And it is this very tradition, this very endeavour, this very faith that has saved our rivers. Whenever such news come to my notice, from any corner of India, it evokes immense respect in my heart for people who embark upon such tasks…and I also feel like sharing that with you. Take a look at Vellore and Thiruvannamalai districts of Tamilnadu, whose example I wish to cite. A river named Naagnadi flows there. Years ago, the Naagnadi had all dried up. Because of that, the water level there had terribly gone down. But, the womenfolk there took up the cudgels to rejuvenate their river. And then…lo and behold – they got people connected, dug up canals through public participation, constructed check dams and recharge-wells. Friends, you too would be glad to know that today, the river is brimming with water. And truly, when a river is full of water, it lends such tranquility to the mind…I have actually, witnessed the experience…
Many of you might be aware that on the very banks of river Sabarmati, Mahatma Gandhi set up the Sabarmati Ashram…during the last few decades, the river had dried up. 6 to 8 months a year, no water was even visible there. But river Narmada and river Sabarmati were linked…today, if you go to Ahmedabad, the waters of river Sabarmati fill one’s heart with such joy! Similarly, our sisters from Tamilnadu are undertaking myriad such tasks…many such tasks are being done in various corners of the country. I know for sure that many of our saints, our gurus associated with our religious traditions are doing a lot for the sake of water and rivers, along with their spiritual pursuits…many of them are running campaigns to plant trees along riverbanks…at places, dirty water is being prevented from flowing into rivers.
Friends,
when we are celebrating ‘World River Day’ today, I praise and greet all dedicated to this work. But to all people living near every river; to countrymen I will urge that in India in all corners at least once in a year a river festival must be celebrated.
My dear countrymen,
never make the mistake of treating minor issues, little things as small. Through tiny efforts, at times, very significant changes occur, and if we look towards the life of Mahatma Gandhi ji we will find every moment how even small things had so much importance and how using small issues he accomplished big resolutions. Our youth today must know how the campaign for cleanliness continuously gave energy to our freedom movement.It was Mahatma Gandhi who turned cleanliness into a mass movement.
Mahatma Gandhi had connected cleanliness to the dream of Independence. Today after so many decades, the cleanliness movement has once again connected the country to the dream of a new India. And this is also becoming a campaign to change our habits too and we must not forget that this cleanliness is a programme. This cleanliness is a responsibility of the transition of sanskar from generation to generation and when the campaign for cleanliness continues generation after generation in the entire society cleanliness as a trait gets imbibed. And that is why this is not a subject of a year or two; of one government or the other government. Generation after generation, with alertness, continually, without being tired or stopping, with high reverence we have to remain associated with cleanliness and continue the campaign for cleanliness. And I have said earlier too that this cleanliness is a great tribute by this country
to revered Bapu and we have to keep paying this tribute every time; continuously.
Friends,
people know that I don’t ever let go any chance to speak in connection with cleanliness and possibly that is why a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Shriman Ramesh Patel ji has written to me that learning from Bapu, in this “Amrit Mahotsav” of freedom, we should take the resolve of economic cleanliness too. The way building of toilets enhanced the dignity of poor, similarly economic cleanliness ensures rights of the poor; eases their life. You are aware of the campaign that the country started regarding Jandhan accounts. Today, because of this the rightful money of the poor is getting credited directly into their accounts and because of this, obstacles like corruption have reduced very significantly. It is true that technology can help a lot in economic cleanliness. It is matter of delight for us that even in villages, the common person is getting connected in the direction of digital transactions through fin-tech UPI… its prevalence has begun increasing. I will tell you a figure which will make you proud; during last August, 355 crore UPI transactions took place in one month, that is more than nearly 350 crore transactions, that is, we can say that during the month of August UPI was used for digital transactions more than 350 crore times. Today, on an average, digital payments of more than 2 lakh crore Rupees is happening through UPI. Through this the economy of the country is acquiring cleanliness and transparency, and we all know that now the importance of fin-tech is increasing a lot.
Friends,
Bapu had connected cleanliness with independence; the same way he had made khadi the identity of freedom. Today in the 75 th year of freedom when we are celebrating the Amrit Mahotsav of Independence, we can say with satisfaction today that our young generation today is giving khadi the place of pride that khadi had during freedom struggle. Today the production of khadi and
handloom has increased multiple times and its demand too has increased. You too know that there were many such occasions when business of more than a crore rupees has been transacted in the khadi showroom in Delhi. I too would like to remind you again that on the 2 nd of October, on revered Bapu’s birth anniversary, let us together aim for another new record. In your city wherever khadi is sold, handloom is sold, handicraft is sold and now that the festival of Diwali is there.., for the festive season, every khadi, handloom, cottage industry purchase of yours should strengthen the campaign for ‘Vocal for Local’, it
should break all old records.
Friends,
in this period of Amrit Mahotsav, a campaign to disseminate to everyone the untold stories of the history of freedom is also going on… and for this, upcoming writers, youth of the country and the world were called upon. For this more than 13 thousand people have registered till now and that too in 14 different languages. And for me a thing of joy also is that non-resident Indians
from more than 20 countries have expressed their wish to join this campaign. There is another interesting information- more than nearly 5000 upcoming writers are searching out tales of struggle for freedom. They have taken the lead to write something on those who are unsung heroes, who are un-named, whose names don’t appear on the pages of history, on the theme of such unsung heroes, on their lives, on those events, that is the youth of the country have decided to bring forth the history of those freedom fighters who were not even discussed during the last 75 years. I appeal to all the listeners; I appeal to all those connected with the field of education. You too motivate the youth. You too come forward and it is my firm belief that during the Amrit Mahotsav of Independence the people who are working for writing history will make history as well.
My dear countrymen,
we all know about the Siachen Glacier. The cold there is so terrible that it is beyond capacity of a common person to live there. With snow spread far and wide, there is no sign of any vegetation anywhere. The temperature here dips to even minus 60 degrees. A few days ago, the feat that a team of 8 Divyang persons performed in this inaccessible region of Siachen is a matter of pride for every countryman. This team created a world record by hoisting its flag on the Kumar Post situated at an altitude of more than 15 thousand feet at the Siachen glacier.
Despite the challenges of physical ability, the feats that these Divyangs have achieved are an inspiration for the whole country and when you get to know about the members of this team, you will also be filled with courage and enthusiasm, just like I was.The names of these brave Divyangs are – Mahesh Nehra, Akshat Rawat of Uttarakhand, Pushpak Gawande of Maharashtra, Ajay Kumar of Haryana, Lobsang Chospel of Ladakh, Major Dwarkesh of Tamil Nadu, Irfan Ahmed Mir of Jammu and Kashmir and Chongjin Ingmo of Himachal Pradesh. This operation to conquer the Siachen Glacier has been successful because of the veterans of the special forces of the Indian Army. I commend the team for this historic and unprecedented achievement. It also shows the spirit of our countrymen to tackle every challenge with a “Can Do Culture”, a “Can Do Determination” and a “Can Do Attitude”.
Friends,
today many efforts are being made for the welfare of Divyangjan in the country. I got a chance to know about one such effort being made in Uttar Pradesh – “One Teacher, One Call”. This unique effort in Bareilly is showing a new path to the Divyang children. This campaign is being led by the principal of a school in Dabhaura Gangapur, Deepmala Pandey ji. During the Corona period, due to this campaign, not only did the admission of a large number of children become possible, more than 350 teachers have also joined it with a spirit of service. These teachers go from village to village calling for Divyang children, looking out for them and then ensuring their admission in one school or the other. I deeply appreciate this noble effort of Deepmala ji and her fellow teachers for the sake of Divyangjans. Every such effort in the field of education is going to shape the future of our country.
My dear countrymen,
the condition of our lives today is such that the word Corona resonates in our ears many times a day… the biggest global pandemic in a hundred years, COVID-19 has taught every countryman a lot. Today there has been an increase in curiosity and awareness about Healthcare and Wellness. Traditionally natural products which are beneficial for wellness and health are available in abundance in our country. Patayat Sahu ji, who lives in Nandol, Kalahandi, Odisha, has been doing unique work in this area for years. He has planted medicinal plants on one and a half acres of land. Not only this, Sahu ji has also carried out documentation of these medicinal plants. Satish ji of Ranchi has shared another similar information to me through a letter. Satish ji has drawn my attention to an Aloe Vera Village in Jharkhand. The women of Deori village near Ranchi had undergone training in Aloe Vera cultivation from Birsa Agricultural School under the leadership of Manju Kachhap ji. After this they started cultivating aloe vera. Not only did this farming benefit in the field of health; the income of these women also increased. They had good income even during the Covid pandemic. One of the major reasons for this was that the companies making sanitizers were buying Aloe Vera directly from them. Today a team of about forty women is involved in this work. And Aloe Vera is cultivated over many acres. Whether it is Patayat Sahu ji of Odisha or this team of women in Deori, the way they have linked agriculture with the field of health is an example in itself.
Friends,
the 2nd of October also marks the birth anniversary of Lal Bahadur Shastri ji. In his memory, this day also teaches us about those who attempt new experiments in agriculture. To promote start-ups in the field of medicinal plants, an Incubator by the name of Medi-Hub TBI is operational in Anand, Gujarat. In a very short time, this Incubator associated with medicinal and aromatic plants has supported the business idea of 15 entrepreneurs. Sudha Chebrolu ji has launched her start-up only after getting the help of this Incubator. Priority is given to women in this company and they are also responsible for innovative herbal formulations. Another such entrepreneur is Subhashree ji who has also received help from this Medicinal and Aromatic Plants Incubator. Subhashree ji’s company is working in the field of herbal room and car fresheners. She has also created a herbal terrace garden which has more than 400 medicinal herbs.
Friends,
the Ministry of Ayush has taken an interesting initiative to increase awareness about Medicinal and Herbal Plants among children and Professor Ayushman ji has taken the lead. It is possible that you must be wondering who Professor Ayushman is! Actually Professor Ayushman is the name of a comic book. In this, short stories have been prepared through different cartoon characters. Along with this, the usefulness of healthy medicinal plants like Aloe Vera, Tulsi, Amla, Giloy, Neem, Ashwagandha and Brahmi has been mentioned. Friends, in the current context, with the trend of people around the world regarding medicinal plants and herbal products increasing, India has immense potential. In the past, there has been a significant increase in the export of Ayurvedic and herbal products.
I urge scientists, researchers and people associated with the start-up world to pay attention to such products, which not only increase the wellness and immunity of the people, but also help in increasing the income of our farmers and youth.
Friends,
moving beyond traditional farming, novel initiatives and options are being done in agriculture and are continuously creating new means of self-employment. The story of two brothers from Pulwama is also an example of this. The way Bilal Ahmed Sheikh and Munir Ahmed Sheikh found new avenues for themselves in Pulwama, Jammu and Kashmir, they are an example of New India.39 years old Bilal Ahmed ji is highly qualified, he has obtained many degrees. He is now using his experience of higher education by launching his own start-up in agriculture.Bilal ji has installed a unit of Vermi composting at his home. The bio-fertilizer prepared from this unit has not only benefited a lot in agriculture ; it has also brought employment opportunities to the people.Every year, farmers are getting about three thousand quintals of Vermicompost from the units managed by these brothers. Today 15 people are also working in this Vermicomposting unit. A large number of people are reaching to see this unit, and most of them are young people who want to do something in the agriculture sector. The Sheikh brothers of Pulwama took a pledge to become a job creator instead of a job seeker and today they are showing a new path not only to Jammu and Kashmir, but to the people across the country as well.
My dear countrymen,
the 25th of September is the birth anniversary of a great son of the country, Pandit Deen Dayal Upadhyay ji. Deen Dayal ji is one of the greatest thinkers of the last century.His economic philosophy, his policies aimed at empowering the society, the path of Antyodaya shown by him remain as relevant in the present context and are also inspirational. Three years ago, on his birth anniversary, the 25th of September, the world’s largest health assurance scheme – Ayushman Bharat scheme was implemented. Today, more than two and a half crore impoverished people of the country have got free treatment up to Rs 5 lakh in the hospital under the Ayushman Bharat scheme. Such a massive scheme for the poor is dedicated to the Antyodaya philosophy of Deen Dayal ji. If the youth of today inculcate values and ideals into their lives, it can be of great benefit to them. Once in Lucknow, Deen Dayal ji had said – “How many good things, good qualities there are – we derive all these from the society itself. We have to pay the debt of society, we must think on these lines .” That is, Deen Dayal ji taught us that we take so much from society, from the country, whatever it be, it is only because of the country ; thus we should think about how we will repay our debt towards the country. This is a significant message for today’s youth.
Friends,
from the life of Deen Dayal ji, we also get a lesson to never give up. Despite the adverse political and ideological circumstances, he never wavered from the vision of a Swadeshi, home grown model for the development of India. Today many young people want to move ahead by breaking away from the oft-treaded paths. They want to do things their own way. Deen Dayal ji’s life can teach them a lot. That is why I urge our youngsters to definitely know about him.
My dear countrymen,
we touched upon many topics today. Like we were discussing, the time to come is of festivals. The whole country is also going to celebrate the festival of the victory over untruth by Maryada Purushottam Shri Ram. But during this festival we have to remember about one more fight – that is the country’s fight against Corona. Team India is making new records everyday in this fight. With regards to Vaccination, the country has made many such records which are being talked about the world over. Every Indian has an important role in this fight. We have to get the vaccine administered when our turn comes, but we also have to take care that no one is left out of this circle of safety. Those around you who have not got vaccinated also have to be taken to the vaccine center. Even after getting vaccinated, the necessary protocol has to be followed. I hope that once again Team India will keep the flag flying high in this fight. Next time, we will discuss some more topics in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Wishing you all, every countryman the best for the fortcoming festivals.
Thank You!
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar…namaskar a billion times! And I am saying ‘koti-koti namaskar’ also since after crossing the 100 crore vaccine doses, the country is surging ahead with a new zeal; renewed energy. The success of our vaccine programme displays the capability of India…manifests the might of our collective endeavour.
Friends,
the figure of 100 crore vaccine doses might surely be enormous, but there are lakhs of tiny inspirational and pride-evoking experiences, numerous examples that are associated with it. Many people are asking in their letters to me how, with the commencement itself of the vaccine, I had developed the belief that this campaign would achieve such a huge success! I had this firm faith, since I am well acquainted with the capabilities of my country and her people. I knew that our healthcare workers would leave no stone unturned in the vaccination of our countrymen. Our health workers, through their tireless efforts and resolve, set a new example…they established a new benchmark in service to humanity through innovation and sheer determination. There are innumerable instances about them that convey how they crossed all hurdles and provided the security shield to the maximum number of people. We’ve often read in newspapers, heard elsewhere as well how hard our people have worked to undertake this task; numerous inspiring examples are there in front of us, one better than the other. Today in Mann ki Baat, I want to introduce to the listeners, one such healthcare worker, Poonam Nautiyal ji from Bageshwar in Uttarakhand. Friends, she is from Bageshwar, part of the very land of Uttarakhand which accomplished the task of administering cent percent of the first dose. The government of Uttarakhand also rightfully deserves accolades since it’s a remote area with difficult terrain. Similarly, Himachal too has completed the task of cent-percent doses amid such difficulties. I am given to understand that Poonam ji has persevered day and night for the vaccination of people in her area.
PM – Poonam ji Namaste
Poonam – Sir Pranam
PM – Poonamji, just tell the country’s listeners something about yourself!
Poonam – Sir, I am Poonam Nautiyal. Sir, I work at the Chaani Koraali Centre in Bageshwar District, Uttarakhand. I am an ANM Sir.
PM – Poonam ji, I am fortunate to have got an opportunity to come to Bageshwar. In a way, it has been a pilgrimage site…there’s an ancient temple as well…I was deeply touched…wonder how people would have managed the task centuries ago!
Poonam – Yes Sir
PM – Poonam ji, have you undertaken the vaccination of all the people in your area?
Poonam – Yes Sir, all people are done with it…
PM – Did you also have to face hurdles of any kind?
Poonam – Yes Sir. Sir, when it used to rain there, the road used to get blocked. We’ve gone crossing the river Sir. And we have gone house to house, just as we’ve gone under the NHCVC…for people who were not able to come to the centre…the elderly, divyang people, pregnant women, lactating women…these people Sir!
PM – But there in the hills, houses too are situated rather distantly!
Poonam – Ji
PM – So, in a day, how much could you manage?
Poonam – Sir in terms of kilometres – 10 kilometres; at times 8!
PM – Well, people who stay in the terai plains would not be able to understand what 8-10 kilometres mean! I know that 8-10 kilometres in the hills mean consuming an entire day!
Poonam – Yes…
PM – But since for an entire day, it must have been an arduous task…along with lugging and carrying all the vaccination apparatus…did any assistant accompany you or not?
Poonam – Yes…team members…we were five people Sir!
PM – Yes…
Poonam –That comprised a doctor, then the ANM, the pharmacist, the ASHA worker and the data entry operator.
PM – O…was connectivity available there or you would do it after returning to Bageshwar?
Poonam – Sir, at places it was available…at times we would do it after coming to Bageshwar.
PM – Okay. I’ve been told Poonam ji, that you went out of the way to get people vaccinated. What was this idea…how did the thought come to your mind and how did you manage it?
Poonam – All of us…the entire team had taken a resolve that not a single person should be left out…the Corona ailment should be made to run away from our country. ASHA and I together prepared a village wise DUE list…and then accordingly, people who came to the centre were administered at the centre itself. Then we went from home to home. Sir, after that, people who were left out…those who could not make it to the centre…
PM – Okay…did you have to explain people?
Poonam – Yes…had to explain…
PM – Are people still keen to get vaccinated?
Poonam – Yes Sir, Yes…Now people have realized. Initially we faced a lot of problems. People had to be convinced that this vaccine is safe; effective as well…that we too had been vaccinated and we are well…right in front of you…all our staff have had it…we are fine!
PM – At any place, was any complaint received from anyone? Later?
Poonam – No no Sir. This did not happen.
PM – Nothing happened?
Poonam – Ji
PM – All were satisfied?
Poonam – Yes
PM – That it’s fine…
Poonam – Yes
PM– Well…you have accomplished a great feat. And I know how difficult the entire area is, along with trudging through the hills! One climbs up a hill…then descends…then walk up another hill…houses too are located afar! Despite that, you accomplished this impressive task!
Poonam – Thank you Sir. Am fortunate to have spoken to you!
PM – It is on account of the hard work put in by lakhs of health workers like you that India could cross the hundred crore vaccine doses mark. Today, I am gratefully expressing thanks, not just to you but to every Bharatvasi, every Indian who raised the ‘Sabko vaccine – Muft vaccine’ campaign to such lofty heights of success. Many good wishes to you and family from my side.
My dear countrymen,
you are aware that next Sunday, the 31st of October is the birth anniversary of Sardar Patel ji. On behalf of every listener of Mann ki Baat…and from myself…I bow to the Lauh Purush, the Iron Man. Friends, we celebrate the 31st of October as National Unity Day.
It is our duty that we must associate ourselves with some activity that conveys the message of national unity. You must have noticed that recently Gujarat Police took out a Bike rally from the Lakhpat Fort in Kutch to the Statue of Unity. To celebrate Unity Day the personnel of Tripura Police are organising a Bike Rally from Tripura to the Statue of Unity… That is connecting the country from East to West. Personnel of Jammu- Kashmir police too are giving this message of unity of the country by taking out a similar Bike Rally from Uri to Pathankot. I salute all these jawans. I have also come to know of many sisters from Kupawara district of Jammu-Kashmir itself. In Kashmir, these sisters are working to make the Tricolour for the Army and government offices. This work is brimming with the sentiment of patriotism. I appreciate the spirit of these sisters. You too must do something for the unity of India, for the greatness of India. You will see how satisfying this is.
Friends,
Sardar Sahab used to say- “We can take our country to loftier heights only through our united efforts. If we don’t have unity amongst ourselves, we will get entangled in ever new calamities”. That is, with national unity, the nation has stature and has development. We can learn a lot from the life and thoughts of Sardar Patel. The Information and Broadcasting Ministry of the country has recently published a pictorial biography of Sardar Saheb too.I would want that all our young friends must read this. By this you will get a chance to know of Sardar Saheb in an interesting way.
Dear countrymen,
life desires continuous progress, desires development, desires to surpass heights. However much science may advance, however much the pace of progress may be, however grand the buildings may be, life feels incomplete. But when song-music, art, drama-dance, literature is added to these, their aura , their liveliness increases many times. In a way if life has to be meaningful, all these too are as necessary….that is why it is said that all these forms act as a catalyst in our lives, act to enhance our energy. The role of songs – music and other art forms is major in developing the inner self of humans, in creating the path of journey of our inner self. And another strength of these is that neither time nor boundaries can limit them…not even beliefs or discordance can limit these. The colours of one’s art, culture, song, music must certainly be filled in Amrit Mahotsav too. I too am getting several suggestions from you regarding Amrit Mahotsav and this strength of songs-music-arts. These suggestions are very valuable for me. I had sent them to the Culture Ministry for analysis. I am happy that in such a short time span the Ministry took up the suggestions very seriously and has also worked on it. One of these suggestions is of a competition on patriotic songs! During the freedom struggle patriotic songs and devotional songs in different languages, dialects had united the entire country. Now in this Amrit kaal, our young people can instill this event with energy by writing such patriotic songs. These patriotic songs can be in the mother tongue, can be in national language, and can be written in English too. But it is essential that these creations reflect the thought of new India; inspired by the current success of the country, it should be such that fuels the country’s resolve for the future. The Culture Ministry is geared to conduct a competition related to this from tehsil to the national level.
Friends,
similarly a listener of “Mann Ki Baat” has suggested that Amrit Mahotsav should be connected to the art of Rangoli too. For centuries, we have had a tradition of lending colours to festivals through Rangoli. The diversity of our country is visible in Rangoli. Rangoli is drawn in different states with different names and on different themes. Therefore, the Ministry of Culture is also going to conduct a National Competition associated with this. Just imagine, when a Rangoli related to the freedom movement will be created, people will draw a picture of a hero of the freedom struggle at their door, on their wall and depict an event of our independence movement with colours, hues of the Amrit festival will also increase manifold.
Friends,
we also have another art form known as Lori. Here, samskars are inculcated in young children through lullabies and they are introduced to the culture. Lullabies also have their own diversity. So why don’t we, in the Amritkaal period, revive this art also and write lullabies pertaining to patriotism, write poems, songs, something or the other which can be easily recited by mothers in every home to their little children. In these lullabies there should be reference to modern India, the vision of 21st century India and its dreams. The ministry has decided to organize a competition related to it after receiving suggestions from the listeners.
Friends,
these three competitions are going to commence on the birth anniversary of Sardar Sahib from 31st October. In the coming days, the Ministry of Culture will provide all the information related to these events. This information will also be available on the website of the ministry, and will be circulated through social media. I want you all to be associated with this. Our young friends must showcase their art, their talent in this. Through this the art and culture of your area will also reach every nook and corner of the country, your stories will be heard by the whole country.
Dear countrymen,
during this period of Amrit Mahotsav, we are remembering the brave sons and daughters of the country, those great and virtuous souls. Next month, the birth anniversary of one such icon and a brave warrior, Bhagwan Birsa Munda ji is falling on the 15th of November. Bhagwan Birsa Munda is also known as ‘Dharti Aaba’. Do you know what this epithet means? It means the father of earth. The way Bhagwan Birsa Munda fought to protect his culture, his forest, his land, it could have only been done by ‘Dharti Aaba’! He taught us to be proud of our culture and roots. The foreign rule subjected him to countless threats and applied immense pressure, but he did not relinquish the tribal culture.
If we have to learn to love nature and the environment, then for that too, Dharati Aaba Bhagwan Birsa Munda is one of our greatest inspirations. He strongly opposed every such policy of foreign rule, which was detrimental for the environment. Bhagwan Birsa Munda was always at the forefront while helping the poor and the distressed. He also made the society aware towards eliminating social evils. Who can forget his leadership during the Ulgulan movement! This movement shook the British and as an aftermath the British had placed a huge reward on Bhagwan Birsa Munda. The British government put him in jail; he was tortured to such an extent that he left us at the age of less than 25years. He left us, but only in the body; in the public psyche, Lord Birsa Munda resides forever! His life remains an inspirational force for the people. Even today folk songs and stories, full of his courage and valour are very popular in the central region of India. I bow to ‘Dharti Aaba’ Birsa Munda and urge the youth to read more about him. The more you know about the unique contribution of our tribal populace in the freedom struggle of India, the more you will feel proud.
My dear countrymen,
today on 24th October, UN Day i.e. ‘United Nations Day’ is celebrated. This is the day when the United Nations was established; India has been a member since the formation of the United Nations. Do you know that India had signed the Charter of the United Nations in 1945 prior to independence. A unique feature related to the United Nations is that the woman power of India has played a large role in increasing the influence and strength of the United Nations.
In 1947-48, when the Universal Declaration of UN Human Rights was being drafted, it was being inscribed in that Declaration “All Men are Created Equal”. But a Delegate from India objected to this and then it was written in the Universal Declaration – “All Human Beings are Created Equal”. This was in consonance with India’s age-old tradition of Gender Equality. Did you know that Smt. Hansa Mehta was the delegate because of whom this became possible? At the same time, another delegate Smt. Lakshmi Menon had strongly put forth her views on the issue of gender equality. And not only this, in 1953, Smt. Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit became the first woman President of the UN General Assembly.
Friends,
we are the people of a land, who believe and pray:
Om Dyau Shanti-Rantariksha-GwamShantih,
Prithvi Shanti-Rapah Shanti-RoshadhayahShantih।
Vanas-Patayah Shanti-VishwedDevah Shanti-Brahma Shantih,
Sarvag-WamShantih Shanti-Reva Shantih Sa Ma Shanti-Redhi॥
Om ShantihShantihShantih॥
India has always strove for world peace. We are proud of the fact that India has been a part of UN peacekeeping missions continuously since the 1950s.India is also playing a leading role in addressing issues related to poverty alleviation, climate change and workers. Apart from this, India is working closely with WHO or World Health Organization to popularize Yoga and AYUSH. In March 2021, WHO announced that a Global Centre for Traditional Medicine would be set up in India.
Friends,
today while talking about the United Nations I’m also remembering the words of Atal ji. In 1977, he made history by addressing the United Nations in Hindi. Today I want to play an excerpt of Atal ji’s address for the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Listen to Atal ji’s resounding voice –
” Here I am not thinking about the supremacy and prominence of nations. The esteem and advancement of the common man are of more importance to me. Ultimately, the only criterion to measure our successes and failures is whether we strive to assure justice and dignity to the entire humanity, virtually every man, woman and child.”
Friends,
these words of Atal ji show us the way even today. India’s contribution in making this earth a better and safer planet is a big inspiration for the entire world.
My dear countrymen,
just a few days ago, on the 21st of October, we celebrated Police Commemoration Day. On this day we especially remember our brave hearts of the police who have laid down their lives in the service of the country. Today I would like to remember these policemen along with their families. A tough service like the police is very difficult without the support and sacrifice of the family.
There is one more thing related to police service that I want to convey to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Earlier it was believed that services like army and police are meant only for men. But today it is not so. The statistics from the Bureau of Police Research and Development show that in the last few years, the number of women police personnel has doubled. In 2014, while their number was close to 1 lakh 5 thousand, by 2020 it has increased by more than double and this number has now reached up to 2 lakh 15 thousand.
Even in the Central Armed Police Forces, the number of women has almost doubled in the last seven years. And I’m not talking just about numbers. Today the daughters of the country are performing even the toughest duties with full force and zeal. For example, many daughters are currently undergoing one of the most difficult trainings, that of Specialized Jungle Warfare Commandos. They will be a part of our Cobra Battalion. Friends, today when we go to airports, metro stations or see government offices, brave women of CISF are seen guarding every sensitive place.
The most positive effect of this is on the morale of our police force as well as society. The presence of women security personnel naturally instills a sense of confidence among the people, especially women. They naturally feel connected to women security personnel. Because of the sensitivity in women, people tend to trust them more. These policewomen of ours are also becoming role models for lakhs of other daughters of the country. I would like to request the women police personnel to visit the schools in their areas once the schools open and talk to the girls there.
I am sure that this conversation will give a new direction to our new generation. Not just that, it will also increase public confidence in the police. I hope that more women will join the police service in future, lead the New Age Policing of our country.
My dear countrymen,
in the last few years, the pace at which the use of modern technology has increased in our country, the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ often keep writing to me about it. Today I want to discuss with you one such topic, which has caught the imagination of our country, especially our youth and even little children. This topic is of Drones, of the Drone Technology. Up until a few years ago, when the name of Drone used to come up, what used to be the first feeling in the minds of the people?… Of the army, of weapons, of war. But today if we have any wedding procession or function, we see a drone shooting photos and videos. The spectrum of a drone’s usage and its capabilities is not just limited to that. India is one of the first countries in the world, which is preparing digital records of land in its villages with the help of drones. India is working extensively on using drones for transportation. Whether it is farming in the village or delivery of goods at home; Providing help in emergency or monitoring law and order ; it is not long before we will see drones being deployed for all these needs of ours. Most of these have already started. Like a few days ago, nano-urea was sprayed in the fields through drones in Bhavnagar, Gujarat. Drones are also playing their role in the Covid vaccine campaign. We got to see a picture of this in Manipur, where vaccines were delivered via a drone to an island. Telangana has also done trials for vaccine delivery by drone. Not just that, drones are also being used to monitor many big infrastructure projects. I have also read about a young student who, with the help of his drone, worked to save the lives of fishermen. Friends, earlier there were so many rules, laws and restrictions in this sector that it was not possible to unlock the real capabilities of a drone. The technology that should have been seen as an opportunity was seen as a crisis. If you have to fly a drone for any work, then there was such a hassle of license and permission that people would give up on the mere mention of the name of drone. We decided that this mindset has to be changed and new trends have to be adopted. Which is why on the 25th of August this year, the country brought forward a new drone policy. This policy has been formulated according to the present and future prospects related to drones. With this, you will neither have to be entangled in the web of multiple forms anymore, nor will you have to pay as much fees as before. I am happy to inform you that after the introduction of the new drone policy, foreign and domestic investors have invested in many drone start-ups. Many companies are also setting up manufacturing units. The Army, Navy and Air Force have also placed orders worth more than Rs 500 crores with the Indian drone companies. And this is just the beginning. We must not stop here. We have to become a leading country in Drone Technology. For this, the Government is taking all possible steps. I will also urge the youth of the country to certainly think about taking advantage of the opportunities created after the Drone Policy and come forward.
My dear countrymen,
a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Shrimati Prabha Shukla from Meerut in UP has sent me a letter related to cleanliness. She has written – “We all celebrate cleanliness during festivals in India. Similarly, if we make cleanliness a daily habit, then the whole country will become clean.” I appreciate Prabha ji’s message. Indeed, where there is cleanliness, there is health, where there is health, there is capability, and where there is capability, there is prosperity. That is why the country is giving so much emphasis on Swachh BharatAbhiyan.
Friends,
I was happy to know about Saparom Naya Sarai, a village near Ranchi. There used to be a pond in this village, but people had started using this pond area for defecating in the open. Under the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan, after toilets were built in everyone’s homes, the villagers thought why not make the village clean as well as beautiful. Lo and behold! Everyone got together and made a park at the place of the pond. Today that place has become a community spot for people, for children. This has brought a big change in the life of the whole village. I also want to tell you about the women of Deur village of Chhattisgarh. The women here run a self-help group and work together to clean the village squares, roads and temples.
Friends,
the people of Ghaziabad in UP know Ramveer Tanwar as the ‘Pond Man’. Ramveer ji was doing a job after completing his mechanical engineering. However, such a sense of devotion for cleanliness ignited in his mind that he left his job and started cleaning ponds. So far, Ramveer ji has revived many ponds by cleaning them.
Friends,
the efforts of cleanliness can be fully successful only when every citizen understands cleanliness as his or her responsibility. Now, during Diwali, we are all about to get involved in cleaning our houses. But during this time we have to take care that our neighbourhood along with our house should also be clean. It should not be that we clean our house, but the dirt of our house reaches outside, on our roads. And yes, when I talk about cleanliness, then please do not forget the mantra of getting rid of Single Use Plastic. Come, let us take a pledge that we will not let the enthusiasm of Swachh Bharat Abhiyan diminish. Together, we will make our country completely clean and keep it clean!
My dear countrymen,
the whole month of October is painted in the hues of festivals and after a few days from now Diwali will be around the corner. Diwali, then Govardhan Puja, then Bhai Dooj, these three festivals shall of course be there and there will also be Chhath Puja during this interregnum. It is also the birth anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev Ji in November. When so many festivals happen together then their preparations also start long before. All of you must have started planning for shopping from now on, but do you remember, shopping means ‘VOCAL FOR LOCAL’. If you buy local, then your festival will also be illuminated and the house of a poor brother or sister, an artisan, or a weaver will also be lit up. I am sure that the campaign which we all have started together will be stronger this time during the festivals. Do share on social media about the local products you buy from there too. Inform those around you too. We’ll meet again next month, and we’ll once again discuss many such topics.
Many thanks to all of you! Namaskar !
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar. We are connecting once again today for Mann Ki Baat. Two days later, the month of December is commencing…and with the onset of December, we psychologically feel “O…the year has concluded!” This is the last month of the year and one starts sketching out plans for the New Year. This month itself, the country also celebrates Navy Day and Armed Forces Flag Day. All of us know that on the 16th of December, the country is also celebrating the golden jubilee of the 1971 War. On all these occasions, I remember the country’s Armed Forces…I remember our brave hearts. And especially, I remember the brave mothers who give birth to such bravehearts. As always, this time too, I have received numerous suggestions from all of you on the Namo App and MyGov. Considering me to be a part of your family, you have also shared your lives’ joys and sorrows. In that, there are many young people; students as well! I really feel good for the fact that this Mann Ki Baat family of ours is continually growing…connecting with hearts and connecting through goals too. And our ever deepening bonds are creating a surge of a flow of constant positivity within us.
My dear countrymen,
Ojaswi from Sitapur has written to me that he enjoys discussions touching upon the Amrit Mahotsav, a lot. He listens to Mann Ki Baat with his friends and is continuously trying to know and learn more about the Freedom Struggle. Friends, the Amrit Mahotsav, along with learning, also inspires us to do something for the country. And now, throughout the country, whether it’s common folk or governments; from Panchayats to Parliament, the resonance of the Amrit Mahotsav is palpable…programmes in connection with the Mahotsav are going on successively. One such interesting programme was held in Delhi recently. In the programme, ‘Azadi Ki Kahani – Bachchon Ki Zubani’, children narrated stories connected with the Freedom Struggle from the core of their hearts. The special element in that was – along with India, students from Nepal, Mauritius, Tanzania, New Zealand and Fiji too participated in that activity. Our country’s Maharatna, ONGC too is celebrating the Amrit Mahotsav in a slightly different manner. These days, ONGC is organizing study tours to oil fields for our students. In these tours, youth are being imparted knowledge on ONGC’s Oil Field Operations…with the objective that our budding engineers be able to contribute their bit to nation building efforts with full zest and fervor.
Friends,
keeping in view the contribution of our tribal communities in attaining Freedom, the country has also celebrated the ‘Janajati Gaurav Saptah’. Across different regions of the country, programmes related to that were held. In the Andaman-Nicobar archipelago, people from tribal communities such as Jarwa and Onge vibrantly displayed their culture. Miniature Writer Ram Kumar Joshi ji from Una, Himachal Pradesh too has done some remarkable work…on tiny postage stamps, he has drawn outstanding sketches of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and former Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri. On the word ‘Ram’ written in Hindi, a brief biography of both the great men has been inscribed. Some friends from Katni, Madhya Pradesh have conveyed information on a memorable Dastangoi, story-telling programme. In that, memories of the indomitable courage and sacrifice of Rani Durgavati have been rekindled. One such programme took place in Kashi. A three-day Festival was organized in honour of illustrious luminaries such as Goswami Tulsidas, Sant Kabir, Sant Ravidas, Bharatendu Harishchandra, Munshi Premchand and Jaishankar Prasad. In different periods, all of them played a major role in fostering public awakening in the country. You might be aware…in the last episodes of Mann Ki Baat, I had referred to three competitions – one was on writing patriotic songs; one on drawing Rangolis on events connected with patriotic fervor and the Freedom movement and one on scripting lullabies that nurture dreams of a grand India in the minds of our children. I hope that you certainly must have sent in your entries too for these competitions…you must have made plans as well…you must have discussed it among friends too! I hope you will promote this programme in every corner of India with wholehearted enthusiasm.
My dear countrymen, in this discussion, I now straightaway take you to Vrindavan. It is said about Vrindavan that it is a tangible manifestation of God’s love. Our saints too have remarked:
“Yeh aasa dhari chitta mein, yeh aasa dhari chitta mein
Kahat jathaa mati mor
Vrindavan sukh rang kau, Vrindavan sukh rang kau
Kaahu na payau aur”
Meaning, We all refer to the glory of Vrindavan, according to our own capabilities…but the inner joy of Vrindavan, its inherent spirit…nobody can attain it in its entirety…it is infinite. That is exactly why Vrindavan has been attracting people from all over the world. You will find its mark in every corner of the world.
There is a city in Western Australia – Perth. Cricket lovers must be well acquainted with the place since cricket matches are often held there. In Perth, there is an art gallery called Sacred India Gallery. This gallery has been set up in the beautiful region of Swan Valley and it is the result of the efforts of a resident of Australia Jagat Tarini Dasi ji. Jagat Tarini ji is actually an Australian…born and brought up there, but she came to Vrindavan and spent more than 13 years here. She says that though she returned to Australia…came back to her own country…but she could never forget Vrindavan. That’s why, in order to stay spiritually connected with Vrindavan, she created Vrindavan in Australia itself. Making her art a medium, she set up a marvelous Vrindavan.. People who come here get an opportunity to view myriad artefacts. They get to see glimpses of the most famous pilgrimage centres of India – the traditions and culture of Vrindavan, Navaadweep and Jagannathpuri. Here, many an artwork related to the life of Bhagwan Shrikrishna has been exhibited. There is an artifact as well, that displays the Govardhan Parvat, held aloft by Bhagwan Shrikrishna on his little finger, with people of Vrindavan taking refuge beneath. Indeed, this matchless endeavour on part of Jagat Tarini ji brings to the fore the power of Krishna-Bhakti. I extend my best wishes on this effort of hers.
My dear countrymen,
I was just referring to the subject of Vrindavan, built at Perth, Australia. There’s an interesting history as well…in that, Australia shares a bond with our Jhansi, Bundelkhand. Actually, when the Queen of Jhansi Laxmibai was fighting a legal battle against the East India Company, her lawyer was John Lang. John Lang was originally a resident of Australia. Staying in India, he fought Rani Laxmibai’s case. All of us know of the huge contribution of Jhansi and Bundelkhand in our Fight for Freedom. Veeranganas, brave hearts such as Rani Laxmibai and Jhalkaribai hailed from here…this region has given to the country legendary sports persons like Major Dhyanchand too.
Friends,
it is not necessary that bravery should be displayed only on the battlefield. When bravery becomes a vow and it expands, then many feats start getting accomplished in every field. Mrs. Jyotsna has written a letter to me about very such valor. There was a traditional river in Jalaun – Noon River. Noon, used to be the main source of water for the farmers here, but gradually the Noon river reached the verge of extinction, the little existence that was left of this river, in that it was turning into a drain. Due to this, problems in irrigation had also arisen for the farmers. The people of Jalaun took the initiative to change this situation. This very year in March, a committee was formed for this. Thousands of villagers and local people spontaneously volunteered to join this campaign. The panchayats here started working together with the villagers, and today in such a short time, and at a very low cost, the river has come back to life again. So many farmers are benefiting from this! Apart from the battlefield, this example of bravery shows the determination of our countrymen, and it also tells that if we take a resolve, nothing is impossible and that is why I say – ‘Sabka Prayas’…everyone’s effort.
My dear countrymen,
when we conserve nature, in return nature also gives us protection and security. We experience this in our personal life as well and one such example has been presented by the people of Tamil Nadu on a large scale. This is the example of Thoothukudi district of Tamil Nadu. We know that coastal areas are many a time prone to land submersion. There were many such small islands and islets in Thoothukudi too, which were increasingly in danger of submerging in the sea. The people here and the experts found the mitigation from this natural disaster through nature itself. These people are now planting Palmyra trees on these islands. These trees stand firm even in cyclones and storms and give protection to the soil. Through this now a new confidence has arisen in saving this area.
Friends,
nature poses a threat to us only when we disturb her balance or destroy her sanctity. Nature nurtures us like a Mother and fills our world with vivid colors too.
I have been watching on social media the picture of a flying boat in Meghalaya that is becoming viral. This picture catches our attention at the very first sight itself. Most of you must have certainly seen it online. When we look closely at this boat floating in the air, we come to know that it is moving on the river water. The water of the river is so clear that we can see its bed and the boat seems to be floating in the air. There are many states in our country ; there are many areas where people have preserved the colors of their natural heritage. These people have kept the lifestyle of living in harmony with nature alive even today. This is an inspiration to all of us too. Whatever natural resources are around us, we should save them, bring them back to their actual form. In this lies the interests of all of us ; interests of the world.
My dear countrymen,
when the government makes plans, spends the budget, completes the projects on time, people feel that it is working. But in the many works of the government, amidst the many schemes of development, things related to human sensitivities always give a different kind of joy. With the efforts of the government, with the schemes of the government, the way a life changed… what is the experience of that changed life? When we hear this, we too are filled with empathy. It also gives satisfaction to the mind and gives inspiration too to take that scheme to the people. In a way, it is just ‘Swant: Sukhay’, joy to one’s own soul and that is why today in “Mann Ki Baat” two such friends are also joining us who have won a new life through their zeal. They got their treatment done with the help of Ayushman Bharat scheme and have started a new life. Our first friend is Rajesh Kumar Prajapati who had an ailment of the heart – heart disease.
So let’s talk to Rajesh ji –
Prime Minister – Rajesh ji Namaste.
Rajesh Prajapati – Namaste Sir Namaste.
Prime Minister – What was your disease Rajesh ji? You must have gone to some doctor, just explain to me what the local doctor must have said… you must have also gone to some other doctor? Then you would not have been able to take the decision or would have taken, what all used to happen?
Rajesh Prajapati – Ji the problem was with my heart Sir. I used to have a burning sensation in the chest, Sir, then I showed it to the doctor. The doctor at first said “Son, maybe you have acid”… so I got treatment for acid quite some time, when I did not benefit from it, then showed it to Dr. Kapoor, then he said son, the symptoms you have will become clear by angiography, then he referred me to ShriRam Murthy. Then we met Amresh Agarwal ji, so he did my angiography. Then he said “Son, there is blockage in your vein”, so I said sir, how much will it cost? Then he said that there is a card of Ayushman which PM ji made. Then I said sir, I have it with me. Then he took that card of mine and all my treatment has been done with that card. Sir and this card that you have made in a very good way and for us poor people is very convenient. And how can I thank you!
Prime Minister – What do you do Rajesh ji?
Rajesh Prajapati – Sir, presently I am doing a private job. Sir
Prime Minister – And how old are you?
Rajesh Prajapati – I am forty nine years old, Sir.
Prime Minister – You got heart trouble at such a young age?
Rajesh Prajapati – Yes sir what to say now!
Prime Minister – In your family, earlier did your father or mother have such a thing?
Rajesh Prajapati – No sir, nobody had sir, this has happened first with me only.
Prime Minister – This Ayushman card, Government of India gives this card. This is a big scheme for the poor, so how did you come to know of it?
Rajesh Prajapati – Sir, this is such a big scheme, poor people get a lot of benefit from it and are so happy sir. I have seen in the hospital how many facilities people get from this card when they tell the doctor that they have the card. Sir, the doctor then says, okay bring that card and I will treat you with the same card.
Prime Minister – Ok, if you did not have the card, how much expenses the doctor had told you?
Rajesh Prajapati – The doctor had said that son, it will cost a lot if the card is not there. So I said sir, I have the card, so he asked me to show it immediately, so I showed it immediately. All my treatment was done with the same card, not a single penny of mine was spent, all the medicines have also been issued through the same card.
Prime Minister – So Rajesh ji, you are satisfied now, your health is fine?
Rajesh Prajapati – Sir, thank you very much sir, may you live so long that you always remain in power and our family members are also happy with you, what to say!
Prime Minister: Rajesh ji, don’t wish me for being in power, I am not in power even today and I don’t want to be in power in future also. I only want to be in service; for me this post, this Prime Ministership, all these things are not at all for power, brother, they are for service.
Rajesh Prajapati: Service is what we need… what else!
Prime Minister: See this Ayushman Bharat scheme for the poor in itself…
Rajesh Prajapati: Yes Sir, it is a very nice thing
Prime Minister: But see Rajesh ji, you do one thing for us, will you?
Rajesh Prajapati: Yes, absolutely Sir!
Prime Minister: See what happens – people do not know about it, you should take on a duty, find out how many poor families are around you, and how you benefited from it, how did you get help? Do tell them!
Rajesh Prajapati: Will absolutely tell Sir.
Prime Minister: And do tell them that they should also get such a card made because the family does not know when a problem may come and it is not right that the poor remain bothered on account of medicines today. Now, because of money they do not take medicine or do not seek the remedy of the disease then it is also a matter of great concern, and what happens to the poor as you’ve had this heart problem, for many months you would not have been able to work.
Rajesh Prajapati: I could not walk ten steps, I could not climb stairs Sir.
Prime Minister: So Rajesh ji, by becoming a good friend of mine, you can explain this Ayushman Bharat scheme to as many poor people as you can. By the way, you can help the sick people, see you will also be satisfied and I will be very happy that come on Rajesh ji’s health not only became fine but Rajesh ji got the health of hundreds of people better. This Ayushman Bharat scheme, it is for the poor, it is for the middle class, it is for the common families, so this information must be conveyed to every house by You !
Rajesh Prajapati: Will definitely convey Sir. I stayed there for three days in the hospital, Sir, so many poor people came to the hospital and told them about all the facilities ; if there is a card, it will be done for free.
Prime Minister: Alright, Rajesh ji, keep yourself healthy, worry a little about your body, take care of the children and wish you a lot of progress. I wish you all the best.
Friends, we listened to Rajesh ji, now Sukh Devi ji is joining us. A knee problem had bothered her a lot, let us first listen from Sukhdevi ji about her plight and then how succour came to her, let us understand
Modi ji – Sukhdevi ji Namaste! Where are you speaking from?
Sukhdevi ji – from Danadpara.
Modi ji – Where does this lie?
Sukhdevi ji – in Mathura.
Modi ji – In Mathura, then Sukhdevi ji, one has to say Namaste and say Radhe-Radhe as well!
Sukhdevi ji – Yes, Radhe-Radhe!
Modi ji – Well I heard that you were suffering. Have you had any operation? Can you tell what is the matter?
Sukhdevi ji – Yes, my knee was damaged, so I have had an operation in Prayag Hospital |
Modi ji – how old are you Sukhdevi ji?
Sukhdevi ji – My age is 40 years.
Modi ji – 40 years ! And named Sukhdevi ! And Sukhdevi got sick?
Sukhdevi ji – I got sick when I was about 15-16 years old.
Modi ji – OMG! Your knees got affected at such a young age?
Sukhdevi ji – What is that called.. arthritis – gout pain in the joints, the knee got worse due to that.
Modi ji – So from the age of 16 to 40, you did not get treatment for this?
Sukhdevi ji – No, it was treated. Small time doctors who kept on giving medicine for pain, this is that desi medicine, this is that medicine. Quacks! I was able to walk with them but the knees got worse, I had only walked 1-2 kilometers and then my knees got worse.
Modi ji – So Sukhdevi ji how did the idea of ​​ operation come about? How did you manage the money for it? How did all of this happen?
Sukhdevi ji – I have got the treatment done with the Ayushman card.
Modi ji – So you had got an Ayushman card?
Sukhdevi ji – Yes.
Modi ji – And there is free treatment for the poor with Ayushman card. Did you know this?
Sukhdevi ji – There was a meeting in the school. From there, my husband came to know and he got the card made in my name.
Modi ji – Yes.
Sukhdevi ji – Then I got the treatment done by card, and I did not spend any money. I have been treated by the card itself. It has been a great treatment.
Modi ji – Good. If there was no card, how much cost did the doctor say earlier?
Sukhdevi ji – 2.5 lakh rupees, three lakh rupees. For 6-7 years I’ve been on the cot! I used to say that oh God call me, I don’t want to live!
Modi ji : you were on the cot for 6-7 years! Good God!
Sukhdevi ji – Yes.
Modi ji – Oho!
Sukhdevi ji – Couldn’t get up at all!
Modi ji – So now your knee is better than before?
Sukhdevi ji – I walk around a lot. I roam! I do kitchen work! I do housework! I cook for the children.
Modi ji – So the card of Ayushman Bharat has really made you Ayushman, blessed with long life.
Sukhdevi ji – Thank you very much! Because of your scheme, I got cured, I got back on my feet.
Modi ji – So now even the children must be happy ?
Sukhdevi ji – Yes. The children used to face a lot of trouble. Now if the mother is upset, naturally the child will also be upset.
Modi ji – Look, our health is the biggest happiness in our lives, that everyone should get this cheerful life is the essence of Ayushman Bharat. Sukhdevi ji, I wish you all the very best, Radhe-Radhe to you once again.
Sukhdevi ji – Radhe – Radhe, Namaste!
My dear countrymen, in every country with a large youth population, three aspects matter a lot. Sometimes, it becomes the true identity of the youth. The first aspect is – Ideas and Innovation. The second is the spirit of taking risks and the third is the Can Do Spirit, that is, the determination to accomplish any task, no matter how adverse the circumstances be – when these three things combine, phenomenal results are produced, miracles happen. These days, all we hear about from every corner is about Start-up, Start-up, Start-up. It is true, this is the era of start-up, and it is also true that in the world of start-up, India is leading in a way in the world today. Start-ups are getting record investment year after year. This sector is progressing very fast. The reach of start-ups has increased even in small towns of the country. These days the word ‘Unicorn’ is in vogue. You all must have heard about it. ‘Unicorn’ is a start-up whose valuation is at least 1 Billion Dollars, that is more than about seven thousand crore rupees.
Friends,
till the year 2015, there used to be hardly nine or ten Unicorns in the country. You will be very happy to know that now India is flying high even in the world of Unicorns. According to a report, a big change has come this year. In just 10 months, a unicorn is being raised in India every 10 days. This is also a big thing because our youth have achieved this success in the midst of the corona pandemic. Today there are more than 70 Unicorns in India. That is, there are more than 70 start-ups that have crossed the valuation of more than 1 billion. Friends, due to the success of Start-Ups, everyone has noticed them and the way they are getting support from investors from all over the country and abroad. Perhaps, just a few years ago no one could have imagined this happening.
Friends,
Indian youth are also contributing to the solution of global problems through start-ups. Today we will talk to a young Mayur Patil, he along with his friends have tried to put forward a solution to the problem of pollution.
Modi ji – Mayur ji Namaste.
Mayur Patil – Namaste Sir ji.
Modi ji – Mayur ji how are you?
Mayur Patil – Just fine sir. How are you ?
Modi ji – I am very happy. Ok tell me…You are in the start-up world.
Mayur Patil – Ji
Modi ji – and doing the ‘best’ out of the ‘waste’…
Mayur Patil – Ji
Modi ji – And for the environment too, tell me a little about yourself. Tell us about your work and how did you get the idea behind this work?
Mayur Patil – Sir, I had a motorcycle when I was in college. Its mileage was extremely low and emissions were very high. It was a two stroke motorcycle. Thus, in order to reduce the emissions and increase its mileage by a bit, I started trying. Sometime in 2011-12, I managed to increase the mileage by about 62 kilometres per liter. From there, I got the inspiration to make something that can be mass produced, so that it can be of benefit to many people. So, in 2017-18 we developed its technology and used it in 10 buses of the Regional Transport Corporation. We then checked the results and found that we managed to reduce emissions by forty percent in these buses.
Modi ji – Hmm! Now this technology which you have developed, have you got its patent registered?
Mayur Patil – Haan Ji! It has been patented. This year, it came to us through a patent grant.
Modi ji – And what is your plan to scale it further? How are you doing that? With the result of the buses being received, many other pieces of information must have come out too. What are you thinking of next?
Mayur Patil – Sir, under the aegis of Start-Up India..NITI Aayog has launched the Atal New India Challenge. From there we got the grant and on the basis of that grant, we just started our factory where we can manufacture air filters.
Modi ji – So how much grant did you get from the Government of India?
Mayur Patil – 90 Lakhs
Modi Ji – 90 Lakhs
Mayur Patil – Ji
Modi ji – and your work is done with it.
Mayur Patil – Yes, it has started now. It is in the process.
Modi ji – How many of your friends are doing all of this together?
Mayur Patil – We are four people Sir.
Modi ji – And all four used to study together earlier and from that you got an idea to move forward?
Mayur Patil – Ji! Ji! We were still in college. And in college we thought about all of this and it was my idea that I should at least reduce the pollution of my motorcycle and increase the mileage.
Modi ji – Ok, so if we reduce pollution and increase mileage, how much is the average money that can be saved?
Mayur Patil – Sir, we tested the mileage on the motorcycle, and increased its mileage from 25 Kilometers per liter to 39 Kilometers per liter, that is there was a gain of about 14 kilometers… And 40 percent carbon emissions were reduced. When we tested on the Regional Transport Corporation buses, there was an increase in fuel efficiency by 10 percent and the emissions reduced by 35 to 40 percent.
Modi ji – Mayur, I enjoyed talking to you and do congratulate your friends on my behalf…. You found a solution to the problem that you had in college life and now the path chosen by all of you is providing solutions in solving environmental issues and you have taken up cudgels to address it. And it is the power of the youth of our country that they take up any big challenge and look for avenues. I wish you all the best. Thank you very much
Mayur Patil – Thank you Sir! Thank you!
Friends,
a few years back if someone used to say that he wants to do business or wants to start a new company, then, the elders of the family used to answer that – “Why don’t you want to do a job, have a job bhai! There is security in the job, there is salary. The hassle is also less. But, if someone wants to start their own company today, then all the people around him are very excited and also fully supportive. Friends, this is the turning point of India’s growth story, where people are now not only dreaming of becoming job seekers but also becoming job creators. This will further strengthen India’s stature on the global stage.
My dear countrymen,
today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we talked about Amrit Mahotsav. We discussed how our countrymen are fulfilling new resolutions in this AmritKaal and also mentioned the stories related to the valour of our Army in the month of December. In the month of December, another big day is ahead of us from which we take inspiration. This day is the death anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar on 6th December. Baba Saheb had devoted his entire life in rendering his duties for the country and society. We the countrymen should never forget the basic spirit of our Constitution, that our Constitution expects all of us to discharge our duties – so let us also take a pledge that in the Amrit Mahotsav, we will try to fulfill our duties with full devotion. This shall be our true tribute to Baba Saheb.
Friends,
we are now entering the month of December. It is natural that the next ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of 2021 will be the last ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of this year. We will start the journey again in 2022 and yes, I keep expecting a lot of suggestions from you and will keep doing so. How are you bidding farewell to this year, what are you going to do in the new year, please do tell and yes!… Don’t forget that Corona has not gone yet. It is the responsibility of all of us to take precautions.
Many many thanks!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Presently, you must be amid preparations for bidding farewell to 2021 and welcoming 2022. On New Year, every person, every organization, takes a resolution to do something better, to become better in the coming year. For the last seven years, our ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has also been inspiring us to do better and improve further, by highlighting the goodness of the individual, of the society, of the country. In these seven years, while doing ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I could also have discussed the achievements of the government…You too would have liked it; you would have appreciated it as well! But it is my experience of decades, that away from the glare of the media, away from the headlines of newspapers, there are millions of people who are doing great things. They are expending their today for the ensuing tomorrow of the country. For the coming generations of the country, they are busy today relentlessly with their efforts. Talking about such people is very comforting; gives deep inspiration. For me ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has always been a beautiful garden filled with the efforts of such people and in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, every month my effort is…from this garden, which petal should I pluck for you? I am happy that from the treasure trove of our land the unceasing flow of virtuous deeds keeps on flowing ceaselessly. And today when the country is celebrating Amrit Mahotsav, the mention of this Janashakti; the strength of each and every individual, their efforts, their hard work, in a way, guarantees a bright future for India and humanity.
Friends, this is the strength of the people; it is because of everyone’s effort that India could fight the biggest pandemic in a 100 years. We stood by each other like a family in every difficult moment. To help someone in one’s locality or city… everyone tried to do more than what one could have done. If we compare the vaccination figures of the world today with those of India, it feels that the country has handled such an unprecedented task… how big a goal has been achieved. Crossing the 140 million vaccine dose mark is an achievement of each and every Indian. This shows the trust of every Indian in the system; shows trust in science and in scientists; and is also a testament to the willpower of we Indians who are fulfilling our responsibilities towards the society. But friends, we also have to keep in mind that a new variant of Corona has already knocked at the door. Our experience of the last two years is that our own effort as a citizen is very important to defeat this global pandemic. Our scientists are continuously studying this new Omicron variant. They are getting new data everyday , their suggestions are being worked upon. In such a situation, self-awareness, self-discipline is in itself the country’s strength in fighting against this variant of Corona. It is this very collective strength of ours that will defeat Corona; with this very sense of responsibility we have to enter into 2022.
My dear countrymen, during the battle of Mahabharata, Bhagwan Shri Krishna expressed to Arjuna – ‘ Nabhah Sprisham Deeptam ‘ i.e. touch the sky with pride. This is also the motto of the Indian Air Force. Many lives engaged in the service of Maa Bharati soar over these heights of the sky with pride every day; they teach us a lot. Such was the life of Group Captain Varun Singh. Varun Singh was flying the helicopter that fell prey to a mishap this month in Tamil Nadu. In that accident, we lost the country’s first CDS, General Bipin Rawat and his wife along with many brave hearts. Varun Singh also fought death bravely for many days, but then he also left us. When Varun was in the hospital, I saw something on social media that touched my heart. He was given Shaurya Chakra in August just this year. After this honor, he had written a letter to the principal of his school. After reading this letter, the first thought that came to my mind was that even after reaching the pinnacle of success, he did not forget to nurture his roots. Second – that when he had time to celebrate, he showed concern for the generations to come. He wanted that the lives of the students of the school that he studied in should also be a celebration. In his letter, Varun Singh ji did not boast of his valour; instead he referred to his failures. He talked about how he converted his shortcomings into abilities. At one place in this letter he has written – “ It is ok to be mediocre. Not everyone will excel at school and not everyone will be able to score in the 90s. If you do, it is an amazing achievement and must be applauded. However, if you don’t, do not think that you are meant to be mediocre. You may be mediocre in school but it is by no means a measure of things to come in life. Find your calling – it could be art, music, graphic design, literature, etc. Whatever you work towards, be dedicated, do your best. Never go to bed, thinking, I could have put-in more efforts.
Friends, the mantra he has given to rise from average to extraordinary is equally important. In this letter Varun Singh has written –
“Never lose hope. Never think that you cannot be good at what you want to be. It will not come easy, it will take sacrifice of time and comfort. I was mediocre, and today, I have reached difficult milestones in my career. Do not think that 12th board marks decide what you are capable of achieving in life. Believe in yourself and work towards it.”
Varun had written that if he could inspire even a single student , it would be a lot. But today I would like to say – he has inspired the whole country. Even though his letter talks only to the students , he has given a message to our entire society.
every year I discuss such similar topics with students on exams. This year also I am planning to discuss with the students before the exams. The registration for this program is also going to start two days later, 28th December onwards on Mygov.in . This registration will be on from 28th December to 20th January. For this, online competition will also be organized for students, teachers, and parents of class 9 to 12. I would like you all to take part in this… will get an opportunity to meet you. Together we will brainstorm on many aspects related to examinations, career, success and student life.
My dear countrymen, in Mann ki Baat now, I am going to make you listen to something which has come from far away, across borders. It will delight you and amaze you as well :
(Instrumental + Vocal (VandeMatram))
VandeMataram . vandemataram
SujalanSuphalanMalayajsheetlam
ShasyashamalanMataram. vandemataram
shubrajyotsnapulkitayamini
fullakusumitdrumdalshobinin
suhasini sweet talker
Sukhdanboordaanmataram.
VandeMataram. VandeMataram .
I am sure you must have enjoyed listening to that; with a feeling of pride. The spirit that is embodied in Vande Mataram fills us with pride and enthusiasm.
Friends, you certainly must be thinking… where is this beautiful video from; what country has it come from? The answer will add to your surprise. These students who presented Vande Mataram are from Greece. There they attend a High School at Illia. The beauty and emotion with which they have sung ‘ VandeMataram ‘ is amazing and commendable. Such efforts bring people of two countries closer. My greetings to these students of Greece and their teachers. I appreciate their effort during the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav.
Friends, I would also like to discuss a post of Nilesh ji, a resident of Lucknow. Nilesh ji has showered praises on a unique Drone Show in Lucknow. This drone show was organized in the Residency area of Lucknow. The testimony of the first freedom struggle of 1857 is still visible on the walls of the Residency . In the Drone Show held at the Residency , different aspects of the Indian freedom struggle were brought to life. Be it ‘ Chauri Chaura Andolan ‘ , the ‘ Kakori Train ‘ incident or Netaji Subhash’s indomitable courage and valor, this Drone Show won everyone’s hearts. Similarly, you can also bring to the people the unique aspects related to the freedom movement connected to your cities, villages. In that you can take a lot of help of technology. Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav gives us an opportunity to live the memories of the freedom struggle; gives us an opportunity to experience them. This is an inspiring festival, a motivating occasion , to display the will to do something, to take new resolves for the country. Let us continue to be inspired by the great personalities of the freedom struggle, continue to further strengthen our efforts for the country.
My dear countrymen, our India is endowed with many extraordinary talents, whose work inspires others to do something. One such person is Dr. Kurela Vithalacharya ji from Telangana. He is 84 years old. Vithalacharya ji exemplifies the fact that when it comes to fulfilling your dreams, age does not matter at all. Friends, right from childhood Vitthlacharya ji had a wish to open a big library. The country was a slave then, some circumstances were such that the childhood dream remained just a dream. Over time Vittlachary ji, became a lecturer, deeply studied the Telugu language and also created many works in the same. 6-7 years ago he once again started fulfilling his dream. He started a library with his own books. He put his life’s earnings into this. Gradually, people started joining and contributing to it. In this library at Ramannapet Division in Yadadri-Bhuvnagiri District, there are nearly 2 lakh books. Vitthalacharya ji says that when it comes to studies, none else should have to face the difficulties he had to. Today he feels very happy to see that a large number of students are getting its benefits. Inspired by his efforts, people of many other villages have started setting up libraries.
Friends, books not only impart knowledge; they also shape personality and life. The hobby of reading books leads to a wonderful satisfaction. These days I notice people proudly saying that they have read these many books this year! And that I want to read many more of such books. This is a good trend, which should be enhanced further. I would also ask the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to mention about five books of theirs this year, which have been their favourites. In this way, you will also be able to help other readers to choose good books in 2022. At a time when the screen time is on the upswing, Book Reading should get more and more popular; for that too, we will have to strive together .
My dear countrymen, recently my attention has been drawn to an interesting endeavor. This effort is to make our ancient texts and cultural values ​​popular not only in India but all over the world. In Pune there is a centre named Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute. This institute has started an online course to acquaint the people of other countries with the importance of Mahabharata. You would be amazed to know that although this this course has been started now, the content being taught started taking shape over a 100 years ago. When the Institute started a course with regard to this, it received tremendous response. I am discussing this grand initiative so that people become aware of how the various aspects of our traditions are being presented in a modern manner. Innovative methods are also being adopted to ensure its benefits reach people based across seven seas.
Friends, today there is a growing interest in the world to know about Indian culture. People from different countries are not only curious to know about our culture but are also helping to spread it. One such person is Serbian Scholar Dr.Momir Nikich. He has compiled a Bilingual Sanskrit-Serbian Dictionary. More than 70 thousand Sanskrit words included in this dictionary have been translated into Serbian language. You would be delighted to know that Dr.Nikich has learned Sanskrit language at the age of 70. He tells that he got his inspiration from reading the articles of Mahatma Gandhi. A similar example is that of 93 (Ninety-three) year old Professor J. Gendedharam of Mongolia. In the last 4 decades, he has translated about 40 ancient texts, epics and compositions of India into Mongolian language. Many people are working with this kind of passion in our country too. I also got to know about the efforts of Sagar Mule ji of Goa, who is involved in saving centuries old ‘Kaavi’ painting from extinction. ‘Kaavi’ form of painting covers the ancient history of India in itself. Actually, ‘Kaava’ means red soil. In ancient times red clay was used in this art. During the Portuguese rule in Goa, the people who migrated from there introduced the people of other states to this wonderful painting form. With the passage of time this painting was on the verge of extinction. But Sagar Mule ji has infused a new lease of life to this art. His efforts are also getting a lot of appreciation. Friends, a small effort, even a small step, can make a huge contribution in the preservation of our rich arts. If the people of our country are determined, the passion to adorn, beautify and save our ancient arts across the country can take the form of a mass movement. I’ve talked about a few attempts here. Many such efforts are taking place across the country. Do convey information on them to me through Namo App .
My dear countrymen, the people of Arunachal Pradesh have been running a unique campaign for a year and have named it “Arunachal Pradesh Airgun Surrender Campaign”. In this campaign, people are voluntarily surrendering their airguns – Do you know why? So that indiscriminate hunting of birds can be stopped in Arunachal Pradesh. Friends, Arunachal Pradesh is home to more than 500 species of birds. These include some indigenous species, which are not found anywhere else in the world. But gradually, now the number of birds in the forests has started declining. This airgun surrender campaign is going on now to rectify this very situation. During the past few months, from the hills to the plains, from one community to the other, people everywhere in the state welcomed it with open arms. The people of Arunachal have voluntarily surrendered more than 1600 airguns. I commend and congratulate the people of Arunachal for this.
My dear countrymen, there have been many messages and suggestions related to 2022 from all of you. One theme is always there in most people’s messages. That is of cleanliness and Swachh Bharat. This resolve of cleanliness will be fulfilled only with discipline, awareness and dedication. We can get a glimpse of that in the Puneet Sagar campaign undertaken by cadets. More than 30 thousand NCC cadets participated in this campaign. These cadets cleaned the beaches, removed plastic waste from there and collected it for recycling. Our beaches, our mountains are worth visiting only when there is cleanliness at the place. Many people dream of going to a particular place all their lives… but when they go there, knowingly or unknowingly, they leave behind waste there. It is the responsibility of every countryman that the places which give us so much joy, should not be dirtied by us.
Friends, I have come to know about a start-up named saafwater which has been started by some youth. With the help of Artificial Intelligence and Internet of things , it will give information related to the purity and quality of water in their area to people. This is just the next step of cleanliness. In view of the importance of this start-up for the clean and healthy future of the people , it has also received a Global Award .
Friends, in this effort ‘Ek qadam swachhata ki ore’ , be it the institutions or the government, everyone has an important role. You all know that earlier there used to be a lot of old files and papers in government offices. Ever since the government has started changing the old practices, these files and piles of paper are getting digitized and stored in computer folders . Special campaigns are also being run in ministries and departments to remove the old and pending material. Some very interesting things have happened through this campaign. When this cleanliness drive was started in the Department of Post , the junkyard there became completely empty. Now this junkyard has been turned into a courtyard and cafeteria. Another junkyard has been converted into a parking space for two wheelers. Similarly, the Ministry of Environment converted its vacant junkyard into a wellness centre. The Ministry of Urban Affairs has even installed a Swachh ATM too. Its purpose is that people deposit garbage and take cash in return. Departments under the Civil Aviation Ministry have started making organic compost from dry leaves falling from trees and organic waste. This department is also working to make stationery from waste paper. Our government departments can also be so innovative on a subject like cleanliness. Till a few years ago, no one even believed in it , but today it is becoming a part of the system. This is the new thinking of the country, which is being led by all the countrymen together.
My dear countrymen, this time also in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we touched upon many topics. Like every time, after a month, we will meet again, but, in 2022. Every new beginning also brings an opportunity to recognize your potential. Goals we didn’t even imagine before. Today the country is making efforts for them. It is said here –
Kshanashah kanashashchaiva, vidyam artham cha saadhayet.
Kshane Nashte Kuto Vidya, Kane Nashte Kuto Dhanam ||
That is, when we want to earn knowledge, learn something new or do it, we should make use of every single moment. And when we have to earn money, that is, progress and growth, every particle, every resource, should be used optimally. Since, with the destruction of the moment, learning and knowledge are gone, and with the destruction of the particle, the resource, paths to wealth and progress are closed. This thing is an inspiration for all of us countrymen. We have to learn so much, innovate anew, achieve new goals, therefore , we will have to persevere without wasting even a moment. We have to take the country to new heights of development, so we have to make full use of every resource of ours. In a way, this is also the mantra of Atma Nirbhar Bharat that is self-reliant India, because, when we use our resources properly, we will not let them go waste, only then will we recognize the power of local, only then will the country be self-reliant. So, let us reiterate our resolve to think big, dream big, and work hard to make them come true. And, our dreams will not be limited to us alone. Our dreams will be such that the development of our society and the country is connected, our progress will open the way for the progress of the country and for this, we have to start working from today, without wasting a single moment, without losing a single particle or resource. I am fully confident that with this very resolve the country will move forward in the coming year, and 2022 will be the golden page of building a new India. With this very faith, wishing you all a very Happy 2022. Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today we are coming together through yet another episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This is the first ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of 2022. Today we will once again take forward discussions which are related to the positive inspirations and collective efforts of our country and countrymen. Today is also the death anniversary of our revered Bapu Mahatma Gandhi ji. The 30th of January reminds us of the teachings of Bapu. Just a few days ago, we celebrated Republic Day as well. The display of the nation’s valour and strength, which we witnessed on Rajpath in Delhi filled everyone with pride and enthusiasm. One change you must have noticed is that now the Republic Day functions will start from the 23rd of January, i.e. the birth anniversary of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose and will continue till the 30th of January i.e. Gandhiji’s death anniversary. A digital sculpture of Netaji has also been installed at India Gate. We can never forget the way the country welcomed this, the wave of joy that arose from every corner of the country; the kind of feelings expressed by every countryman.
Friends, in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, the country is re-establishing its national symbols through these efforts. We saw that the ‘Amar Jawan Jyoti’ near India Gate and the Jyoti lit at the ‘National War Memorial’ in the vicinity, were merged. There were tears in the eyes of many countrymen and martyr families on this emotional occasion. At the ‘National War Memorial’, the names of all the bravehearts of the country who have been martyred since Independence have been inscribed. Some former soldiers of the army have written to me saying that – “The ‘Amar Jawan Jyoti’ lit at the memorial is a symbol of the immortality of the martyrs”. Truly, like ‘Amar Jawan Jyoti’ our martyrs, their inspiration and their contribution are also immortal. I would urge all of you to certainly visit the ‘National War Memorial’ whenever you get an opportunity. Do take along your family and children too. Here you will feel a different energy and inspiration.
Friends, in the midst of these events of Amrit Mahotsav, many important national awards were also given away in the country. One of them is the Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Baal Puraskaar. These awards are given to the children who have rendered courageous and inspirational work at a young age. We all must highlight about these children in our homes. Our children will also get inspiration from this and the enthusiasm to bring glory to the country will be awakened in them. Padma awards have also just been announced in the country. There are many names among the recipients of Padma awards, about whom very few people know. These are the unsung heroes of our country, who have done extraordinary deeds in ordinary circumstances. For example, Basanti Devi of Uttarakhand, who has been honored with Padma Shri, lived her whole life in the midst of struggles. Her husband died at an early age and she had started living in an ashram. Staying there, she fought to save the river and made an extraordinary contribution to the environment. She has also done a lot of work for the empowerment of women. Similarly, 77-year-old Lorembam Beino Devi of Manipur has been conserving the Liba textile art of Manipur for decades. She has also been awarded the Padma Shri. Arjun Singh of Madhya Pradesh has received Padma award for imparting recognition to the art of Baiga tribal dance. Another person to receive the Padma award is Shriman Amai Mahalinga Naik. He is a farmer and hails from Karnataka. Some people also call him Tunnel Man. He has made such innovations in agriculture, seeing which anyone could be surprised. Small farmers are getting huge benefit from his efforts. There are many more such unsung heroes who have been honoured by the country for their contribution. You must try to know about them. We will get to learn a lot from them in life.
My dear countrymen, all of you send a lot of letters and messages, including many suggestions in connection with The Amrit Mahotsav. Under this series something has happened which is unforgettable for me. More than one crore children have written to me through their ‘Mann Ki Baat’ post cards. These one crore post cards have come from different parts of the country; they have also come from abroad. I have tried to take time out to read many of these post cards. These postcards show how broad and wide is the vision of our new generation for the future of the country. I have shortlisted some postcards for the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ which I want to share with you. Like this one is the post card of Riddhima Swargiyari from Guwahati, Assam. Riddhima is a student of class 7th and she has written that she wants to see an India in the 100th year of independence which is the cleanest country in the world, completely free of terrorism, included in the 100 percent literate countries, Zero accident country, and be capable of food security with sustainable technology. Riddhima, what our daughters think, the dreams they see for the country, do come true. When everyone’s efforts come together, when your young generation will work towards this goal, you will definitely make India the way you want her to be. I have also got a post card of Navya Verma of Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh. Navya has written that her dream for 2047 is of an India where everyone has a dignified life, where farmers are prosperous and there is no corruption.
Navya, your dream for the country is very commendable. The country is also moving rapidly in this direction. You talked about a corruption free India. Corruption hollows the country like a termite. Why wait for 2047 to get rid of it? All of us countrymen, today’s youth have to do this work together, as soon as possible and for this it is very important that we give priority to our duties. Where duty is felt, Duty is paramount, corruption cannot even think of entering there.
Friends, in front of me is another postcard of Mohammed Ibrahim from Chennai. Ibrahim wants to see India as a major power in the field of defence in 2047. He wants that India should have its own research base on the Moon, and that India should start the work of settling the human population on Mars. Ibrahim also sees a big role for India in making the earth free from pollution. Ibrahim, nothing is impossible for a country that has youth like you.
Friends, I have another letter in front of me sent by Bhavna, a class 10th student of Saraswati Vidya Mandir in Raisen, Madhya Pradesh. First of all, I will say to Bhavna that I really liked the way you have decorated your postcard with the Tricolor. Bhavna has written about revolutionary Shirish Kumar.
Friends, I have also received Laurencio Pereira’s postcard from Goa. She is a student of class 12th. The subject of her letter is also – Unsung Heroes of Freedom. I am sharing with you its essence in Hindi. She has written that Bhikaji Cama was one of the bravest women involved in the Indian freedom struggle. She carried out many campaigns in the country and abroad to empower daughters; organized many exhibitions. Certainly Bhikaji Cama was one of the most courageous women of the freedom movement. In 1907, she hoisted the Tricolor in Germany. The person who supported her in designing this Tricolor was Shri Shyamji Krishna Varma. Shri Shyamji Krishna Varma ji died in 1930 in Geneva. His last wish was that after India’s independence, his ashes should be brought to India. Although his ashes should have been brought back to India on the very next day of independence in 1947, this did not happen. Maybe it was the wish of the Almighty to assign me this work… and I was fortune to fulfil this duty. In the year 2003, when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, his ashes were brought to India. A memorial has also been constructed in the memory of Shyamji Krishna Varma ji at his birth place, Mandvi in ​​Kutch.
Friends, the enthusiasm of India’s Azaadi ka Amrit Mahotsav is not limited to our country. I have also received 75 postcards from Croatia, a friendly country of India. Students of the School of Applied Arts and Design in Zagreb, Croatia have sent these 75 cards to the people of India and congratulated them on the Amrit Mahotsav. On behalf of all countrymen, I thank Croatia and her people.
My dear countrymen, India has been the sacred land of education and knowledge. We have not confined education to bookish knowledge, but have seen it as a holistic experience of life. The great personalities of our country have also had a deep relationship with education. While Pandit Madan Mohan Malviya ji founded the Banaras Hindu University, Mahatma Gandhi played an important role in the establishment of Gujarat Vidyapeeth. There is a very lovely place in Anand, Gujarat – Vallabh Vidyanagar. On the insistence of Sardar Patel, two of his associates, Bhai Kaka and Bhikha Bhai, established education centres for the youth there. Similarly, Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore established Shantiniketan in West Bengal. Maharaja Gaikwad was also one of the ardent supporters of education. He got many educational institutions built and inspired many personalities including Dr.Ambedkar and Shri Aurobindo for higher education. In the list of such great personalities, there is also the name of Raja Mahendra Pratap Singh ji. Raja Mahendra Pratap Singh ji had handed over his house for the establishment of a technical school. He gave a lot of financial help for the construction of education centers in Aligarh and Mathura. Sometime back I also had the privilege of laying the foundation stone of a university in his name in Aligarh. I am happy that the same vibrant spirit of taking the light of education to the people continues in India even today. Do you know what is the most beautiful thing about this feeling? That is, this awareness about education is visible at every level in the society. The example of Taimmal ji living in Udumalpet block of Trippur district of Tamil Nadu is very inspiring. Taimmal ji does not have any land of her own. For years, her family is making a living by selling coconut water. The financial condition may not be good, but Taimmal ji had left no stone unturned to educate her son and daughter. Her children studied in Chinnaveerampatti Panchayat Union Middle School. One day in the meeting with the parents in the school, it was raised that the condition of the classrooms and school should be improved; the school infrastructure should be fixed. Taimmal ji was also in that meeting. She heard everything. In the same meeting, the discussion again came to a halt on the paucity of money for these works. After this, no one could have imagined what Taimmal did. Taimmal ji, who had accumulated some capital by selling coconut water, doanted one lakh rupees to the school.
Indeed, it takes a big heart, a sense of service, to do this. Taimmal ji says that in the school that is there has classes till 8th standard. Now when the infrastructure of the school improves, classes till higher secondary education will be held. This is the same sentiment I was talking about regarding education in our country. I have also come to know about a similar donation by an alumnus of IIT BHU. Jai Chaudhary, alumnus of BHU, donated one million dollars i.e. about seven and a half crores to IIT BHU Foundation.
Friends, in our country there are many people belonging to different fields, who are fulfilling their responsibility towards the society by helping others. I am very happy that such efforts are being seen continuously in the field of higher education especially in our different IITs. There is no dearth of such inspiring examples in Central Universities as well. To further enhance such efforts, from September last year, Vidyanjali Abhiyan has also been started in the country. Its objective is to improve the quality of education in schools across the country with the participation of various organizations, CSR and private sector. Vidyanjali is furthering the spirit of community participation and ownership. To be constantly connected with your school, college, to contribute something according to your ability, it is something whose fulfilment and joy can be felt only through experience.
My dear countrymen, love for nature and compassion for every living being, this is our culture as well as innate nature. A glimpse of these Sanskaras of ours was seen recently when a tigress left the world in Pench Tiger Reserve of Madhya Pradesh. People used to call this tigress collared tigress. The Forest Department named it T-15. The death of this tigress made people so emotional as if someone of their own had left the world. People performed her last rites, bid her farewell with full respect and affection. You must have also seen these pictures on social media. This love of Indians for nature and living beings was greatly appreciated the world over. The collared tigress gave birth to 29 cubs in her lifetime and raised 25 of them to maturity. We also celebrated this life of T-15 and when she left the world, we also gave her a heartfelt farewell. This is the specialty of the people of India. We make a relationship of love with every conscious being. We also got to see a similar sight this time in the Republic Day parade as well. In this parade, the charger mount of the President’s Bodyguard, Virat took part in his last parade. Horse Virat came to Rashtrapati Bhavan in 2003 and used to lead the parade every time on Republic Day as Commandant Charger. Even when a foreign head of state was welcomed in Rashtrapati Bhavan, Virat used to play this role. This year, on Army Day, horse Virat was also given COAS Commendation Card by the Army Chief. In view of Virat’s immense services, after his retirement he was given farewell in an equally grand manner.
My dear countrymen, when there is a sincere effort, work is done with a noble intention, results also follow. A great example of this has emerged from Assam. As soon as the name of Assam is taken, the thought of tea plantation and many national parks come to mind. Along with this, the picture of one horned rhinoceros i.e. one horn rhino also emerges in our mind. You all know that the one horned rhinoceros has always been a part of Assamese culture. This song of Bharat Ratna Bhupen Hazarika ji will resonate in every ear.
Friends, the meaning of this song is very relevant. This song says, the lush green surroundings of Kaziranga, the abode of elephants and tigers, the Earth watches one horned rhinoceros and listens to the melodious chirping of birds. The images of the rhinoceros are also seen in the Moonga and Eri dresses woven on the world famous handlooms of Assam. The rhinoceros, which has such great glory in the culture of Assam, also had to face difficulties. In 2013, 37 and in 2014, 32 rhinos were killed by poachers. To tackle this challenge, a huge campaign against the poaching of rhinoceros was launched in the last seven years with the special efforts of the Assam government. On the 22nd of September last year, on the occasion of World Rhino Day, more than 2400 horns seized from smugglers were burnt. This was a stern message to the poachers. The result of such efforts is that now there is a steady decrease in the hunting of rhinos in Assam. Where 37 rhinos were killed in 2013, 2 killings in 2020 and only 1 in 2021 have come to the fore. I appreciate the resolve of the people of Assam to save the rhinoceros.
Friends, the diverse colours and spiritual strength of Indian culture have always attracted people from all over the world. If I tell you that Indian culture is very popular in America, Canada, Dubai, Singapore, Western Europe and Japan, you will find this very common; you will not be surprised. But, if I say that Indian culture has a big attraction in Latin America and South America too, you will definitely think once. Whether it is a matter of promoting Khadi in Mexico or an attempt to popularize Indian traditions in Brazil, we have discussed these topics earlier in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Today I will tell you about the Indian culture making its mark in Argentina. Our culture is very much liked in Argentina. In 2018, during my visit to Argentina, I participated in a yoga program – ‘Yoga for Peace’. There is an organization in Argentina – Hastinapur Foundation. You will be surprised to hear… whither Argentina… and Hastinapur Foundation there too! This foundation is involved in the propagation of Indian Vedic traditions in Argentina. It was founded 40 years ago by a lady, Professor Aida Albrecht. Professor Aida Albrecht is going to turn 90 today. How her association with India happened is also very interesting. When she was 18 years old, she was first introduced to the power of Indian culture. She also spent a lot of time in India. She studied about Bhagavad Gita and Upanishads in depth. Today the Hastinapur Foundation has more than 40,000 members and about 30 branches in Argentina and other Latin American countries. Hastinapur Foundation has also published more than 100 Vedic and philosophical texts in Spanish language. Her ashram is also very enchanting. Twelve temples have been built in the ashram, in which there are idols of many Gods and Goddesses. There is also a temple at the center of all this which has been built for Advaitwadi Dhyan.
Friends, hundreds of such examples prove that our culture is a priceless heritage not only for us, but for the whole world. People all over the world want to know it, want to understand it, and want to live it. We should also try to make our cultural heritage a part of our life with full responsibility and try to take it to all the people.
My dear countrymen, I now want to ask a question to you and especially to our youth. Now imagine how many push-ups you can do at once. What I am about to tell you will surely fill you with wonder? Thounaojam Niranjoy Singh, a 24-year-old youth in Manipur, has made a record of 109 push-ups in a minute. Breaking the record is nothing new for Niranjoy Singh, earlier also, he had held the record for most Knuckle push-ups with one hand in a minute. I am sure you will be inspired by Niranjoy Singh and make physical fitness a part of your life.
Friends, today I want to share with you one such information about Ladakh which you will definitely be proud to know about. Ladakh will soon be blessed with an impressive Open Synthetic Track and Astro Turf Football Stadium. This stadium is being built at a height of more than 10,000 feet and its construction is going to be completed soon. This will be the largest open stadium in Ladakh where 30,000 spectators can sit together. This modern football stadium in Ladakh will also have a synthetic track with 8 lanes. Apart from this, there will also be a hostel facility with one thousand beds. You will also like to know that this stadium has also been certified by FIFA, the biggest organization of football. Whenever such a big sports infrastructure comes up, it brings great opportunities to the youth of the country. Alongwith such an arrangement, movement of people from all over the country takes place, tourism gets promoted and many employment opportunities are created. The stadium will also benefit many of our youth in Ladakh.
My dear countrymen, this time also in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we touched upon many topics. There is one more topic, which is on everyone’s mind at this time and that is of Corona. India is fighting with great success with the new wave of corona, it is also a matter of pride that till now about four and a half crore children have been administered the dose of Corona Vaccine. This means that about 60% of youth in the age group of 15 to 18 years have got their vaccines within three to four weeks. This will not only protect our youth but will also help them to continue with their studies. Another good thing is that within 20 days, one crore people have taken the precaution dose as well. This trust of our countrymen on the indigenous vaccine is our great strength. Now the cases of corona infection have also started decreasing – this is a very positive sign. People should be safe, the pace of economic activities of the country should be maintained – this is the wish of every countryman. And you already know, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, there are certain things, I cannot stay without mentioning… like, we should not forget the’Swachhta Abhiyan’ ; we should accelerate the campaign against single use plastic; Vocal for Local mantra is our responsibility, we have to work wholeheartedly for the Atma Nirbhar Bharat campaign. With the efforts of all of us, the country will reach new heights of development. With this wish, I bid you farewell. Thank you very much
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
Welcome to ‘Mann Ki Baat’ once again. Today we will commence ‘Mann Ki Baat’ mentioning India’s success. In the beginning of this month, India has been successful in bringing home an invaluable heritage of hers from Italy. This heritage is the over one thousand years old idol of Avalokiteshvara Padmapani. This idol was stolen a few years ago from Kundalpur temple, Devi Sthan of Gaya ji in Bihar. But after innumerable efforts, India has now got this idol back. Similarly, a few years ago the idol of Lord Anjaneyaar, Hanuman ji was stolen from Vellore in Tamil Nadu. This idol of Hanuman ji was also 600-700 years old. Earlier this month, we retrieved this in Australia; our Mission has received it.
Friends
, in our history of thousands of years, idols, one better than the other were always being made in various parts of the country; it also comprised reverence, capability, skill and was full of varied diversity. And the history of each of our idols also depicts the influence of their respective times. Not only were they a wonderful artistic example of Indian sculpture; our faith was also connected with them. But, in the past, many idols were stolen and kept being taken out of India. Sometimes in this country, at times in another, these idols were sold… and for them they were just pieces of art. Neither did they have anything to do with their history, nor with reverence attached to them. It is our responsibility towards Mother India to bring home these idols. These idols embody a part of the soul of India; faith as well. They also have a cultural-historical significance. Realising this responsibility, India increased her efforts. And resultantly, it fostered a deterrent fear against the tendency to steal. The countries where these idols were stolen and taken away to, also started to feel now that it could also have immense significance in the diplomatic channel of soft power in relations with India. India’s feelings are associated with it; India’s reverence is attached as well, and, in a way, it creates a lot of strength in people-to-people relations as well. Just a few days ago you must have noted that the idol of Ma Annapurna Devi, which was stolen from Kashi, was also brought back. This is an example of the changing global outlook towards India. Till the year 2013, nearly 13 idols had been brought back to India. But, in the last seven years, India has successfully brought back more than 200 precious idols. Many countries such as America, Britain, Holland, France, Canada, Germany, Singapore have understood this sentiment of India and helped us to retrieve these idols. When I went to America in September last year, I came across a lot of very old idols and many artefacts of cultural importance there. Whenever any priceless heritage returns to the country, it is naturally a matter of great satisfaction for all of us….as an Indian, as one who has reverence for history and archaeology, one connected with faith and culture.
Friends
, talking about Indian culture and our heritage, today I want to introduce you to two people in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. These days, two Tanzanian siblings, Kili Paul and his sister Nima, are in the news a lot on Facebook, Twitter and Instagram, and I’m sure you too, must have heard about them. They have a passion, a craze for Indian music and for this reason they are also very popular. Their technique of Lip Sync shows how hard they work at it. Recently, a video of him singing our National Anthem ‘Jana Gana Mana’ on the occasion of Republic Day went viral. A few days ago, he also paid a soulful tribute to Lata didi by presenting her song. I really appreciate these two siblings Kili and Nima very much for their wonderful creativity. A few days ago, he has also been honoured at the Indian Embassy in Tanzania. The magic of Indian music is such that it fascinates everyone. I recall, a few years ago, singers-musicians from more than one hundred and fifty countries of the world, in their respective countries, in their respective costumes, made a successful presentation of ‘Vaishnav Jan’, the beloved bhajan of revered Bapu, the favourite composition of Mahatma Gandhi.
Today, when India is celebrating the important festival of 75th year of its Independence, similar initiatives can be carried out regarding patriotic songs, wherein foreign nationals or famous singers from abroad are invited to render Indian patriotic songs. Not only this, if Kili and Neema in Tanzania can lip sync the songs of India in this manner, aren’t there many types of songs in my country… in many languages ​​​​of our country… can’t any Gujarati children do that with Tamil songs….some children of Kerala could do that with Assamese songs…. some Kannada children could that with songs of Jammu and Kashmir! We can create such an environment in which we will be able to experience ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. Not only this, we can definitely celebrate Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav in a novel way. I urge the youth of the country to make videos of the popular songs of Indian languages ​​in their own way…. you will become very popular! And the diversity of the country will be introduced to the new generation.
My dear countrymen
, just a few days ago, we celebrated International Mother Language Day. Those who are learned can give a lot of academic input about where the word mother tongue came from, how it originated. I would emphasise about mother tongue that as our mother moulds our life, in the same manner, mother tongue also shapes our life. The mother and mother tongue, both together strengthen the foundation of life; lending it permanence. Just like we cannot abandon our mother, similarly, we cannot leave our mother tongue either. I remember an incident of yesteryears, when I had gone to America, I would get a chance to visit different families. Once I went to a Telugu family and I got to see a very happy scenario there. They told me that they had made a rule in the family that no matter how busy one were to be, if they were not outstation, then all the family members would have dinner sitting at the table together and equally compulsory on the dinner table was conversing in Telugu language only. This was also the rule for the children who were born there. Seeing this love for the mother tongue, I was highly impressed by this family.
Friends
, even after 75 years of independence, some people are facing a mental dilemma due to which they have reservations with regard to their language, their dress, their food and drink, whereas, it is not like this anywhere else in the world. It is our mother tongue; we should speak it with pride. And, our India is so rich in terms of languages ​​that it just cannot be compared. The biggest beauty of our languages ​​is that from Kashmir to Kanyakumari, from Kutch to Kohima, hundreds of languages, thousands of dialects which are different from each other but are mutually integrated…many languages – one expression. For centuries, our languages have been evolving whilst learning from each other and ​​have been refining themselves, developing each other. The world’s oldest language Tamil is in India and every Indian should be proud that we have such a significant heritage of the world. In the same way, many ancient scriptures are also there; their expression too is in our Sanskrit language. The people of India are proud to be associated with 121 forms of mother tongues and 14 of these languages ​​are spoken by more than 1 crore people in everyday life. That is, many European countries do not have a total population than the people who are associated with 14 different languages ​​in our country. In the year 2019, Hindi was ranked third among the most spoken languages ​​of the world. Every Indian should be proud of this too. Language is not just a medium of expression, but also serves to preserve the culture and heritage of the society. Surjan Parohi ji is doing similar work in Suriname to save the heritage of his language. He turned 84 on the 2nd of this month. His forefathers also went to Suriname years ago, along with thousands of workers, to earn a living. Surjan Parohi ji writes very good poetry in Hindi; his name is considered among the national poets there. That is, even today Hindustan beats in his heart; there is a fragrance of the soil of India in his works. The people of Suriname have also built a museum in the name of Surjan Parohi ji. It is very heartening for me that in the year 2015 I had the opportunity to honour him.
Friends
, today, that is, 27th February is also Marathi Bhasha Gaurav Divas.
“सर्व मराठी बंधु भगिनिना मराठी भाषा दिनाच्या हार्दिक शुभेच्छा|”
This day is dedicated to Marathi Kaviraj, Vishnu Vaman Shirvadkar ji, Shriman Kusumagraj ji. Today is also the birth anniversary of Kusumagraj ji. Kusumagraj ji wrote poems in Marathi, wrote many plays, and took Marathi literature to new heights.
Friends
, our languages have their own special characteristics; mother tongue has its own science. For understanding this science, emphasis has been laid on studies in the local language in the National Education Policy. Efforts are being made that our professional courses should also be taught in the regional languages. In Azadi Ka Amrit Kaal, we all should lend momentum to this effort together; this is a work indicative of self-respect. I would like you to know about the qualities of whatever mother tongue you speak and write something in it.
Friends
, A few days ago I had a meeting with my friend and former Prime Minister of Kenya, Raila Odinga. This meeting was interesting but also very emotional. Since we are very good friends, we also discuss freely. While both of us were in a conversation, Odinga ji told about his daughter. His daughter Rosemary had a brain tumour and because of this she had to undergo surgery. However, one side-effect of this was that Rosemary almost lost her eyesight; she stopped seeing. You can imagine what must have happened to the daughter…. and we can also guess the condition of the father, we can understand his feelings. In hospitals all over the world… there was not any major country in the world, where he had not tried his best for the treatment of his daughter. He searched the big countries of the world, but, there was no success and in a way, giving up all hopes, there was an atmosphere of despair in the entire household. Meanwhile, someone suggested him to come to India for Ayurveda treatment and even though he had tried a lot and was tired, yet he thought that let’s try once again… see what happens! He came to India, started getting his daughter treated at an Ayurvedic hospital in Kerala. The daughter stayed here for a long time. The effect of this Ayurvedic treatment was such that Rosemary’s eyesight returned to a great extent. You can imagine, as if a new lease of life was given and light came back into Rosemary’s life. As the new light has come in the whole family, Odinga ji was so emotional while telling me this and that he wishes, that the knowledge and science of Ayurveda of India, should be brought to Kenya. The type of plants that are used in it will be cultivated by them and he will do his best to get more people to benefit from it.
It is a matter of great happiness for me that from our land and our tradition have alleviated such a great suffering from someone’s life. You will also be happy to hear this. Which Indian would not be proud of it? We all know that not only Odinga ji but lakhs of people across the world are reaping similar benefits from Ayurveda.
Prince Charles from Britain is also one of the big admirers of Ayurveda. Whenever I meet him, he definitely mentions Ayurveda. He is also aware of many Ayurvedic institutions of India.
Friends
, in the last seven years a lot of attention has been paid to the promotion of Ayurveda in the country. The formation of the Ministry of AYUSH has further strengthened our resolve to popularise our traditional methods of medicine and health. I am very happy that in the last few years many new start-ups have emerged in the field of Ayurveda. The AYUSH Start-up Challenge started earlier this month. The goal of this challenge is to identify and support the start-ups working in this field. I urge the youth working in this field, that they should take part in this challenge.
Friends
, once people are determined to do something together, they do wonderful things. There have been many such big changes in the society, in which public participation, collective effort, has played a significant role. One such mass movement named “Mission Jal Thal” is underway in Srinagar, Kashmir. This is a unique effort to clean the lakes and ponds of Srinagar and restore their old glory. The focus of “Mission Jal Thal” is on “Kushal Saar” and “Gil Saar”. Along with public participation, a lot of help of technology is also being taken in this. To find out where there has been encroachment, where illegal construction has taken place, a formal survey of this area was carried out. Along with this, a campaign to remove plastic waste and clean up the waste was also launched. In the second phase of the mission, a lot of effort was also made to restore the old water channels and 19 springs filling the lake. In order to spread more and more awareness about the importance of this Restoration Project, local people and youth were also made Water Ambassadors. Now the local people here are also taking efforts for increasing the number of migratory birds and fish in “Gil Saar Lake” and are also happy to see it. My heartiest congratulations to the people of Srinagar for this wonderful effort.
Friends
, the ‘Clean India Mission’ started by the country eight years ago, with the passage of time, it expanded manifold… new innovations were also added. Wherever you go in India, you will find that some effort is being made for cleanliness everywhere. I have come to know about one such attempt in Kokrajhar, Assam. Here a group of morning walkers have taken a very commendable initiative under the ‘Clean and Green Kokrajhar’ mission. All of them gave a motivational message of cleanliness by cleaning the three kilometre long road in the new flyover area. Similarly, under the ‘Clean India Campaign’ in Visakhapatnam, cloth bags are being promoted instead of polythene. People here are also campaigning against Single Use Plastic products to keep the environment clean. Along with this, these people are also spreading awareness to segregate the waste at home. The students of Somaiya College in Mumbai have also included beautification in their campaign of cleanliness. They have decorated the walls of Kalyan railway station with beautiful paintings. An inspiring example from Sawai Madhopur in Rajasthan has also come to my notice. The youth here have started a campaign named ‘Mission Beat Plastic’ in Ranthambore, in which plastic and polythene have been removed from the forests of Ranthambore. This spirit of Sabka Prayas, everyone’s effort strengthens public participation in the country and when there is public participation, even the biggest goals are definitely met.
My dear countrymen
, just a few days from today, International Women’s Day will be celebrated all over the world on 8th of March. We have been sharing many examples related to the courage, skill, and talent of women in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Today, whether it is Skill India, Self Help Group, small or big industries, women have taken the lead everywhere. Wherever you see, women are dispelling old myths. Today, in our country, From Parliament to Panchayat, women are reaching newer heights in different fields. In the Army too, daughters are now playing responsibilities in new and bigger roles and are protecting the country. Last month on Republic Day we saw that daughters were flying modern fighter planes too. The country also lifted the restrictions on the admission of daughters in Sainik Schools, and daughters are taking admission in Sainik Schools all over the country. Similarly, look at the start-up world, in the recent years, thousands of new start-ups began in the country. About half of these start-ups have women in director roles. In the recent past, decisions like increasing maternity leave for women have been taken. The country is trying to give equal rights to sons and daughters by fixing a common age for marriage. Due to this, the participation of women is increasing in every field. You must be noticing another major change happening in the country. This change is the success of our social campaigns. Take the success of ‘Beti Bachao, Beti Padhao’… today the sex ratio in the country has improved. The number of girls going to school has also improved. In this we also have a responsibility that our daughters do not drop out of school. Similarly, women in the country have got freedom from open defecation under the ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’. A social evil like triple talaq is also coming to an end. Ever since the law against triple talaq has come into being, there has been a reduction of 80 percent in triple talaq cases in the country. How are all these changes happening in such a short span of time? This change is coming because women themselves are now leading the change and progressive efforts in our country.
My dear countrymen
, tomorrow the 28th of February is ‘National Science Day’. This day is also known for the discovery of Raman Effect. Along with CV Raman ji, I pay my respectful tribute to all the scientists who have contributed significantly in enriching our scientific journey. Friends, technology has secured an important place in our lives in the realm of ease and simplicity. Which technology is good and what is the better use of that technology, we are well acquainted with all these subjects. But, it is also true that the basis of that technology, the underlying science is something that we neglect in conveying to the children of our family. On this Science Day, I urge all the families to definitely start with small efforts to develop a scientific temperament in their children.
Now, for example – poor vision… after wearing glasses, vision improves with clarity… children can easily be explained on the science behind it. It’s not that one should restrict oneself to just looking at the glasses and enjoying. Now you can simply explain to the child on a small piece of paper. Now the child uses a mobile phone…how does a calculator work, how does a remote control work, what are sensors? Along with this, are such scientific elements also discussed in the house? Maybe we can easily explain these things behind the everyday functioning of the household, what is the inherent science behind a phenomenon. In the same way, have we ever indulged in stargazing together with the children? There must have been conversations about stars in the night. Different constellations appear, tell them about them. By doing this you can create a new interest in children towards physics and astronomy. Nowadays, there are also many apps through which you can locate the stars and planets, or, you can identify the star which is visible in the sky and can also know about it. I will also tell our start-ups that you should employ your skills and scientific character in the work related to nation-building. This is also our Collective Scientific Responsibility towards the country. Like, nowadays I see that our start-ups are doing very well in the world of virtual reality. In this era of virtual classes, one such virtual lab can be designed keeping children in mind. We can also make children experience a chemistry lab sitting at home through virtual reality. My request to my teachers and parents is to encourage all the students and children to ask questions and together with them find the right answers to those questions. Today, I would also like to appreciate the role of Indian scientists in the fight against Corona. Due to their hard work, it was possible to manufacture the Made In India vaccine, which has helped the whole world a lot. This is the gift of science to humanity.
My dear countrymen,
this time too we discussed many subjects. Many festivals are lined up in the coming month of March… Shivratri… A few days later we will all will start preparing for Holi. Holi is a festival that unites us all. In this festival, all differences between near-dear ones and strangers, big and small, rancour and envy disappear. That is why it is said that the colours of love and harmony are thicker than the colours of Holi. Along with Gujiya in Holi, there is a unique sweetness of relationships as well. We have to strengthen these bonds further, and relations are not only with the people of our family but also with the people who are part of your larger family. You have to remember the most important way to do so. This is the way of celebrating the festival through ‘Vocal for Local’. You should buy local products on festivals, so that the lives of the people living around you also become colourful and vibrant. The success with which our country is fighting the battle against Corona and moving forward is imparting enthusiasm to the festivals manifold. With this very zeal, we have to celebrate our festivals, and at the same time, we have to maintain our caution. I wish you all a very Happy festival season. I will always be waiting for your words, your letters and your messages.
Thank you very much!
My dear countrymen,
Namaskar! Last week we achieved a feat that filled all of us with pride. You must have heard that last week, India has achieved the export target of $ 400 billion, i.e. 30 lakh crore rupees. At first instance, it might come across as a matter related to the economy; but more than the economy, it is related to the capability of India, the potential of India. At one time, the figure of exports from India used to be 100 billion, at times 150 billion, sometimes 200 billion…today, India has reached 400 billion dollars. In a way, this means that the demand for items made in India is increasing all over the world; the other meaning is that the supply chain of India is getting stronger by the day… and it also has a very big message. The nation takes great strides when resolves are bigger than dreams. When there is a sincere effort day and night for the resolves, those resolutions also attain fruition… and you see, the same happens in a person’s life as well. When one’s resolve, one’s efforts, become bigger than one’s dreams, success comes to the person on its own.
Friends,
new, ever new products from all corners of the country are reaching foreign shores. Leather products from Hailakandi in Assam or handloom products from Osmanabad, fruits and vegetables from Bijapur or black rice from Chandauli, the exports of all of these are increasing. Now, you will also find the world famous apricot of Ladakh in Dubai too and in Saudi Arabia, you will find bananas shipped from Tamil Nadu. Most importantly, an array of new products are being sent to ever newer countries. For example, the first consignment of millets grown in Himachal and Uttarakhand was exported to Denmark. Bainganapalli and Subarnarekha mangoes from Krishna and Chittoor districts of Andhra Pradesh were exported to South Korea. Fresh jackfruits from Tripura were exported to London by air and for the first time King Chilli from Nagaland was dispatched to London. Similarly, the first consignment of Bhalia wheat was exported from Gujarat to Kenya and Sri Lanka. This means, now if you go to other countries, Made in India products will be more visible than ever before.
Friends,
this list is very long and the power of Make In India is equivalent in might to the extent of the list. Equally great is the potential of India… and the basis of its strength are our farmers, artisans, our weavers, engineers, our small entrepreneurs, the MSME sector; people from many different professions, all of them are its true strength. It is only due to their hard work, that the goal of exporting to the tune of $ 400 billion has been achieved and I am happy that this power of the people of India is now reaching new markets in every nook and corner of the world. When each and every Indian is vocal for local, it does not take long for the local to become global. Let’s make the local ‘global’ and augment the prestige of our products further.
Friends,
the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will love to know that the success of our small entrepreneurs at the domestic level also makes us proud. Today our small entrepreneurs are playing a major partnership role in government procurement through Government e-Market place i.e. GeM. A much transparent system has been developed through technology. During the last one year through the GeM portal, the government has purchased items worth more than one lakh crore rupees. Close to 1.25 lakh small entrepreneurs, small shopkeepers from every corner of the country have sold their goods directly to the government. There was a time when only big companies could sell goods to the government. However, the country is changing now; the old systems are also changing. Now even the smallest of shopkeepers can sell one’s goods to the government on the GeM Portal – this is the New India. She not only dreams big, but also shows the courage to reach that goal, where no one has reached before. On the basis of this very courage, all of us Indians together will definitely fulfill the dream of an Aatmanirbhar Bharat, a self-reliant India.
My dear countrymen,
you must have observed Baba Sivanand ji in the recently held Padma Awards ceremony. Seeing the agility of the 126-year-old, everyone must have been surprised just like I was…and I saw, before one could bat an eyelid, he started bowing in the Nandi Mudra. I bowed a number of times and offered Pranaam to Baba Sivanand ji. Both, the age of 126 years and the fitness of Baba Sivanand are the subject of discussion in the country today. I read many people’s comments on social media, that Baba Sivanand is fitter than those one-fourth his age. Indeed, the life of Baba Sivananda is an inspiration for all of us. I wish him a long life. He has a passion for yoga and leads a very healthy lifestyle.
जीवेम शरदः शतम् |
In our culture, everyone is wished a hundred years of healthy life. We will celebrate ‘World Health Day’ on the 7th of April. Today, the collective Indian thought on health, whether it is Yoga or Ayurveda, is increasingly trending all over the world. Just last week you must have noticed a Yoga program being organized in Qatar. In this, citizens of 114 countries participated and made a new world record. Similarly, the market of the Ayush Industry is also increasing continuously. 6 years ago, the market for medicines related to Ayurveda was around 22 thousand crores. Today, the Ayush Manufacturing Industry is reaching around one lakh forty thousand crore rupees, that is, the possibilities are increasing continuously in this sector. In the start-up world too, AYUSH is becoming a subject of attraction.
Friends,
I have often referred to earlier on other start-ups of the health sector, but this time I will talk to you especially on Ayush Start-Ups. There is a start-up Kapiva! Its meaning is hidden in its name. Here, Ka means – Kapha, Pi means – Pitta and Va means – Vaata. This Start-Up is based on healthy eating habits in accordance with our traditions. Nirog-Street too is another start-up which is a unique concept in the Ayurveda Healthcare Ecosystem. Its technology-driven platform connects Ayurveda Doctors from across the world directly to the people. More than 50 thousand practitioners are associated with it. Similarly, Atreya Innovations, a healthcare technology start-up, is working in the field of Holistic Wellness. Ixoreal has not only spread awareness about the use of Ashwagandha, but has also invested a huge amount on top-quality production process. Cureveda has created dietary supplements for Holistic Life through the confluence of modern herbal research and traditional knowledge.
Friends,
I have listed only a few names so far; this list is very long. It is a symbol of the young entrepreneurs of India and the new possibilities being created in India. I also have a request for the Start-Ups of the Health Sector and especially the Ayush Start-Ups. Whatever portal you design online; whatever content you create, try to make it in all the languages ​​​​recognized by the United Nations. There are many such countries in the world where English is neither spoken nor understood much. Promote your information keeping such countries in mind as well. I am sure that soon, Ayush Start-Ups from India with better quality products will reign all over the world.
Friends,
health is also directly related to cleanliness. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we always mention the efforts of the proponents of cleanliness. One such Swachhagrahi is Chandrakishore Patil ji. He lives in Nashik, Maharashtra. Chandrakishore ji’s resolve regarding cleanliness is very heartfelt. He stands by the Godavari river, and constantly encourages people not to throw garbage in the river. If he sees someone doing this, he immediately stops them. Chandrakishore ji invests a lot of his time in this endeavour. By evening, he has a pile of such things, which people have brought to throw into the river. This effort of Chandrakishore ji also raises awareness and is also inspiring. Similarly, there is another Swachhagrahi – Rahul Maharana of Puri in Orissa. Rahul goes to the pilgrimage sites in Puri early in the morning every Sunday, and clears the plastic garbage there. He has cleaned hundreds of kilos of plastic garbage and dirt so far. Be it Rahul of Puri or Chandrakishore of Nashik, they teach us a lot. As citizens, we must carry out our duties, whether it is cleanliness, nutrition or vaccination… all these efforts also help us in staying healthy.
My dear countrymen,
let’s talk about Mupattam Sri Narayanan ji of Kerala. He has started a project named – ‘Pots for water of life’. When you come to know about this project, you will marvel at the wonderful work done.
Friends,
Mupattam Sri Narayanan ji is running a campaign to distribute earthen pots so that animals and birds do not face water problems during summer. In summer, he used to get upset seeing the plight of animals and birds. Then he thought… why not start distributing earthen pots himself so that others were left with only the task of filling water in those pots. You will be surprised that the number of utensils distributed by Narayanan ji is going to cross one lakh. In his campaign, he will donate the hundred thousandth pot to the Sabarmati Ashram established by Gandhi ji. Today, when the summer season has knocked at our doors, this work of Narayanan will definitely inspire all of us and we will also make arrangements for water for our animal and bird friends this summer.
Friends,
I would also request the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to reiterate our resolves. Whatever we can do to save every drop of water, we must do that. Apart from this, we have to keep giving equal emphasis on recycling of water. The water used at home can be used in pots, can be used in gardening, it must be reused. With a little effort, you can make such arrangements in your home. Centuries ago, Rahimdas ji had purposefull said ‘Rahiman paani raakhiye, bin paani sab soon’. And in this task of saving water, I have high hopes from children. Just as our children made cleanliness a movement, they can help save water by becoming a ‘Water Warriors’.
Friends,
for centuries, water conservation in our country; protection of water sources has been part of the nature of society. I am happy that many people in the country have made water conservation a life mission. Like Arun Krishnamurthy is a friend from Chennai! Arun ji is running a campaign to clean the ponds and lakes in his area. He took up the responsibility of cleaning more than 150 ponds and lakes and successfully completed it. Similarly, there is a friend from Maharashtra, Rohan Kale. Rohan is an HR Professional. He is running a campaign to preserve hundreds of step wells in Maharashtra. Many of these wells are centuries old and are part of our heritage. Bansilal-Pet Kuan in Secunderabad is one such step well. Due to years of neglect, this step well got filled with mud and garbage. But now the campaign to revive this step well has started with public participation.
Friends,
I hail from a state where there has always been a shortage of water. These step wells are called Vav in Gujarat. Vav has played a big role in a state like Gujarat. The ‘Jal Mandir Scheme’ played a significant role in the protection of these wells or step wells. Several step wells were revived all over Gujarat. This also helped a lot in raising the water level in these areas. You can also run similar campaigns at the local level. Be it the construction of Check dams or Rain Water Harvesting, individual efforts are also important in this and collective efforts are necessary too. For instance, at least 75 Amrit Sarovars can be made in every district of our country in the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav. Some old lakes can be rejuvenated; some new ones can be dug. I am sure you will definitely make some effort in this direction.
My dear countrymen,
one of the beautiful aspects of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that I get your messages in many languages, in many dialects. Many people also send audio message on MYGOV. India’s culture, our languages, our dialects, our way of life, our culinary range, all of this diversity is our great strength. From east to west, from north to south, this diversity binds India together, leading to Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat. Here too, both our historical sites and Pauranik literature contribute a lot. You must be wondering why I am mentioning this to you right now! The reason for this is the “Madhavpur Mela”. The listeners of Mann Ki Baat will find it very interesting to know where the Madhavpur Mela is held, why it is held, how it is related to the diversity of India.
Friends,
“Madhavpur Mela” is held in the village of Madhavpur near the sea at Porbandar in Gujarat. But it also connects with the eastern end of India. You must be thinking how this is possible! The answer to this also comes from a Pauranik story. It is said that thousands of years ago Lord Krishna was married to Rukmani, a princess from the North East. This marriage took place in Madhavpur, Porbandar and as a symbol of the that marriage, even today Madhavpur fair is held there. This deep relationship between the East and West is our heritage. With the passage of time with the efforts of the people, new aspects too are now being added to the Madhavpur fair. In local parlance, the bride’s side is called Gharati and now many Gharaatis from the North East have started coming to this fair. Artists from all the states of the North East reach the Madhavpur Fair, which lasts for a week; when artisans associated with handicrafts arrive and the beauty of the fair is enhanced manifold. For a week, this amalgamation of cultures of the East and West of India, the Madhavpur fair creates a very beautiful example of Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat. I request you to read and know more about this fair as well.
My dear countrymen,
the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav in the country is now becoming a new example of public participation. A few days ago, on the 23rd of March, many celebrations were held in different corners of the country on Martyrs’ Day. The country remembered te heroes and heroines of her Independence; remembered them reverently. On the same day I also got the opportunity to dedicate to the nation the Biplobi Bharat Gallery at Victoria Memorial, Kolkata. This is a very unique gallery to pay tribute to the brave revolutionaries of India. If you get n opportunity, you must certainly visit it. Friends, in the month of April we will also celebrate the birth anniversary of two great personalities. Both of them have left their deep impact on Indian society. These great personalities are – Mahatma Phule and Babasaheb Ambedkar. We will celebrate Mahatma Phule’s birth anniversary on the 11th of April and Babasaheb’s birth anniversary on the 14th of April. Both of these great men fought persistently against discrimination and inequality. Mahatma Phule opened schools for girls in that era; raised his voice against female infanticide. He also launched large campaigns to get rid of the water crisis.
Friends,
the mention of Savitribai Phule ji is equally important in this reference to Mahatma Phule. Savitribai Phule played a significant role in the formation of many social institutions. As a teacher and a social reformer, she also made the society aware and encouraged it. Together they founded the Satyashodhak Samaj…they made efforts for the empowerment of the people. We can clearly see the influence of Mahatma Phule in the work of Babasaheb Ambedkar. He also used to say that the development of any society can be assessed by looking at the status of women in that society. Taking inspiration from the life of Mahatma Phule, Savitribai Phule, Babasaheb Ambedkar, I request all the parents and guardians to ensure education for their daughters. In order to increase the enrollment of daughters in schools, the Kanya Shiksha Pravesh Utsav has also been started a few days ago… the focus is on bringing back to school those girls who missed their studies for some reason.
Friends,
it is a matter of good fortune for all of us that we have also got an opportunity to work for Panch Teerth associated with Babasaheb. Be it his birthplace in Mhow, Chaityabhoomi in Mumbai, his home in London, the Deeksha Bhoomi in Nagpur, or Babasaheb’s Maha-Parinirvana Sthal in Delhi, I have had the privilege of visiting all the places, all sacred sites. I would urge the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to visit the places associated with Mahatma Phule, Savitribai Phule and Babasaheb Ambedkar. You will get to learn a lot there.
My dear countrymen,
this time too in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we talked on many topics. Many festivals are lined up next month. Navratri is only a few days away. In Navratri, we practice fasting, perform sadhana of Shakti, worship Shakti…that is, our traditions teach us celebration and restraint as well. Sanyam and Tap are also a festival for us, which is why Navratri has always been very special for all of us. There is also the festival of Gudi Padwa on the very first day of Navratri. Easter also comes in April and the holy days of Ramadan are also starting. Let us celebrate our festivals by including everyone together, strenthening India’s diversity… this is our collective desire. That’s all this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I will see you again next month with new topics.
Many many thanks !
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
With new topics, with new inspirational examples, gathering new messages, I have come once again to express ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with you. Do you know about which topic I have received the maximum letters and messages this time? This subject is such that it is connected to past, present and future; all three. I am talking about the country’s new Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya. On this 14th April, the birth anniversary of Babasaheb Ambedkar, the Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya was dedicated to the nation. It has been opened for the citizens of the country. One such listener is Shrimaan Sarthak ji; Sarthak ji lives in Gurugram and has visited the Pradhanmantri Sangrahalaya at the very first opportunity. The message that Sarthak ji has written to me on Namo App is very interesting. He has written that for years he has been watching news channels, reading newspapers, along with being connected to social media, so he used to think that his general knowledge was good enough… but, when he visited the PM Museum, he was very surprised, he realized that he did not know much about his country and those who led the country. He has written about certain facets of the PM Museum which heightened his curiosity such as the spinning wheel of Lal Bahadur Shastri, gifted to him by his in-laws, that made Sarthak ji happy. He also saw Shastri ji’s passbook noticing how little savings he had. Sarthak ji has written that he did not even know that Morarji Bhai Desai was Deputy Collector in Gujarat before joining the freedom struggle.
He had a long career in the administrative service. On Chaudhary Charan Singh ji, Sarthak ji writes that he was unaware of Chaudhary Charan Singh ji’s great contribution in the field of zamindari abolition. Not just that, he further writes he saw that Mr. P.V. Narasimha Rao ji took a very keen interest in the work of Land Reform. Sarthak ji also came to know only after coming to this museum that Chandrashekhar ji had undertaken the historic Bharat Yatra, walking more than 4 thousand kilometers. In the museum, when he saw the items that Atalji used, listened to his speeches, he was filled with pride. Sarthak ji also mentioned that this museum also provides very interesting information about Mahatma Gandhi, Sardar Patel, Dr. Ambedkar, Jai Prakash Narayan and our Prime Minister Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru.
Friends, what can be a better time to remember the contribution of the Prime Ministers of the country than the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav? It is a matter of pride for the country that the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav is taking the form of a mass movement. People’s interest in history is increasing a lot and in such a situation the PM Museum is also becoming a centre of attraction for the youth, connecting them with the precious heritage of the country.
By the way, friends, when so much is being discussed with you about the museum, I felt that I should also ask you some questions. Let’s see what your general knowledge says… how much information you have! Are you ready, my young friends, are you readywith your paper and pen? What I am going to ask you right now, you can share the answers on NaMo App or social media with #MuseumQuiz… and do share. I urge you to answer all these questions. This will enhance interest in the museum among people all over the country. Do you know in which city of the country there is a famous Rail Museum where people have been getting a chance to see the heritage of Indian Railways for the last 45 years? Let me give you another clue. You can also find here,from the Fairy Queen, the Saloon of Prince of Wales to the Fireless Steam Locomotive. Do you know which museum is there in Mumbai, where we get to see the evolution of currency in a very interesting way? Here coins of the sixth century BC are present; on the other hand, e-Money is also present. The third question –  ‘Virasat-e-Khalsa’ is related to this museum. Do you know, in which city of Punjab is this museum located? All of you must be enjoying a lot in kite flying; the next question is related to this. Where is the country’s one and only Kite Museum? Let me give you a clue, the biggest kite displayed here is 22 by 16 feet in size. Did something come to mind –No?Let me tell you one more thing here – the city in which it is located has a special connection with Bapu. Who does not have the hobby of collecting postage stamps in childhood! But, do you know where the National Museum related to postage stamps is in India? I ask you one more question. Which museum is housed in a building named Gulshan Mahal? The clue for you is that in this museum you can also become the director of a film, you can also see the nuances of camera, editing. Ok,do you know of any museum that celebrates India’s textile heritage? This museum has miniature paintings, Jaina manuscripts, sculptures -…many more. It is also known for its unique display.
Friends, in this era of technology, it is very easy for you to find answers to these. I asked these questions so that the curiosity in our new generation rises… they read more about them;go and visit them. Now, because of the importance of museums, many people themselves are coming forward and donating a lot to the museums. Many people are donating their old collections, as well as historical artefacts, to museums. When you do this, in a way, you share a cultural treasure with the entire society. In India too, people are now coming forward for this. I also appreciate all such individual efforts. Today, in the changing times and due to the covid protocols, emphasis is being placed on adopting new methods in museums. The focus has also increased on digitization in museums. You must be aware that on the 18
th
of MayInternational Museum Day will be celebrated all over the world. In view of this, I have an idea for my young friends. Why not visit a local museum with your circle of friends during the upcoming holidays. Do share your experience with #MuseumMemories. By doing so you will also awaken curiosity about museums in the minds of others.
My dear countrymen, you must be taking many resolves in your life, and be you must be working hard to fulfill them. Friends, recently, I came to know about such a resolve, which was really different, very unique. That’s why I thought that I must share it with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Friends, can you imagine that someone could come out of one’s house with a resolve that one would roam the whole city for the whole day without doing any money transaction in cash – isn’t this an interesting resolve. Two daughters of Delhi, Sagarika and Preksha, experimented with
Cashless Day Out
like this. Wherever Sagarika and Preksha went in Delhi, they got the facility of digital payment. Because of the UPI QR code, they did not have to withdraw cash. Even at most of the street food and roadside vendors they got the facility of online transaction.
Friends, one may  think that it is Delhi, a metro city, it is easy to have all this here. But now it is not the case that this spread of UPI is limited only to big cities like Delhi. I have also received a message from Anandita Tripathi from Ghaziabad. Anandita had gone to the North East with her husband last week. She narrated me the experience of her journey from Assam to Meghalaya and Tawang in Arunachal Pradesh. You will also be pleasantly surprised to know that in this journey of spanning several days, they did not need to withdraw cash even in remote areas. In places where there was no good internet facility till a few years ago, now there is also the facility of payment through UPI. Looking at the experiences of Sagarika, Preksha and Anandita, I would also urge you to try the experiment of Cashless Day Out, definitely do it.
Friends, in the last few years, BHIM UPI has rapidly become a part of our economy and habits. Now, even in small towns and in most villages people are transacting through UPI itself. A culture is also evolving in the country throughS Digital Economy. In the small street shops digital paymenthas made it easy to serve more and more customers. Now they don’t even have a problem of loose change. You must also feel the convenience of UPI in everyday life. Wherever you go… carrying cash, going to the bank, finding an ATM… the hassle is now over. All payments are made from mobile itself, but, have you ever thought that how big a digital economy has been created in the country due to these small online payments of yours. At present, transactions worth about 20 thousand crore rupees are taking place in our country every day. Last March, UPI transactions reached around Rs 10 lakh crores. Due to this, convenience is also increasing in the country and an atmosphere of honesty is also being created. Now many new start-ups related to Fin-tech are also coming up in the country. I would like you to share any experiences related to this power of digital payment and start-up ecosystem. Your experiences can become an inspiration to many other countrymen.
My dear countrymen, how the power of technology is changing the lives of ordinary people, we are constantly seeing this around us. Technology has done another great job. It has served to bring the benefit of the extraordinary abilities of the Divyang friends  to the country and the world. At the Tokyo Paralympics we have seen what our Divyang brothers and sisters can achieve. Just like in sports, in arts, academics and many other fields, Divyang friends are doing wonders, but when these friends get the power of technology, they achieve even greater heights. That is why, the country is constantly making efforts to make the resources and infrastructure accessible to the differently-abled. There are also many start-ups and organizations in the country which are doing inspirational work in this direction. There is one such organization – Voice of Specially Abled People, this organization is promoting new opportunities in the field of assistive technology. An innovative beginning has also been made to take the work of Divyang artists to the world. Voice of Specially Abled People has prepared a digital art gallery of paintings of these artists. How Divyang friends are rich in extraordinary talents and what extraordinary abilities they have – this art gallery is an example of that. What are the challenges in the life of Divyang friends, how far can they reach after overcoming them?You can feel many such facets in these paintings. If you also know a Divyang friend, know their talent, then with the help of digital technology, you can bring them to the fore in front of the world. Divyang friends must also join such endeavours.
My dear countrymen, summer heat is increasing very fast in most parts of the country. This rising heat equally increases our responsibility to save water. It is possible that there may be plenty of water available where you are now. But, you also have to always remember the crores of people who live in water-stressed areas, for whom every drop of water is like elixir.
Friends, at this time in the 75th year of independence, in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, water conservation is one of the resolves with which the country is moving forward. During the Amrit Mahotsav, 75 Amrit Sarovars will be built in every district of the country. You can imagine how big the campaign is. The day is not far when there will be 75 Amrit Sarovars in your own city. I would like all of you, and especially the youth, to know about this campaign and also bear responsibility for it. If there is any history related to freedom struggle in your area, if there is a memory of a freedom fighter, you can also connect it with Amrit Sarovar. By the way, I like to learnthat after taking the resolve of Amrit Sarovar, work has started on it at many places at a rapid pace. I have come to know about Gram Panchayat Patwai of Rampur in UP. There was a pond on the land of the Gram Sabha, but it was full of filth and heaps of garbage. With a lot of hard work, with the help of local people, with the help of local school children, that dirty pond has been transformed in the last few weeks. Now, many arrangements have been made on the banks of that lake like retaining wall, boundary wall, food court, fountains and lighting. I congratulate the Patwai Gram Panchayat of Rampur, the people of the village, the children there for this effort.
Friends, the availability of water and the scarcity of water, these determine the progress and speed of any country. You must have also noticed that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I do talk about water conservation again and again along with topics like cleanliness. It is clearly stated in our scriptures –
Paniyam paramam loke, jeevaanaam jeevanam samritam ||
That is, in the world, water is the basis of life of every living being and water is also the biggest resource, that is why our ancestors gave so much emphasis on water conservation. From Vedas to Puranas, to save water everywhere, to build ponds, lakes etc., has been termed as the social and spiritual duty of a person. In Valmiki Ramayana, special emphasis has been laid on water conservation, on connecting water sources. Similarly, students of history would know, how much engineering was developed in India regarding water even during the Indus-Saraswati and Harappan civilizations. In ancient times, there was an interconnected system of water sources in many cities and this was the time, when the population was not that much, there was no shortage of natural resources, there was a kind of abundance, yet, about water conservation the awareness was very high then,. But, today the situation is reverse. I urge all of you to know about such old ponds, wells and lakes in your area. Due to the Amrit Sarovar Abhiyan, along with water conservation, a distinct identity of your area will also develop. With this, local tourist places will also be developed in cities, localities, people will also get a place to walk around.
Friends, every effort related to water is related to our tomorrow. It is the responsibility of the whole society. For this, different societies have madevarious efforts continuously for centuries. For example, ‘Maldhari’, a tribe of “Rann of Kutch” uses a method called “Vridas” for water conservation. Under this, small wells are built and trees and plants are planted nearby to protect it. Similarly, the Bhil tribe of Madhya Pradesh used their historical tradition “Halma” for water conservation. Under this tradition, the people of this tribe gather at one place to find a solution to the problems related to water. Due to the suggestions received from the Halma tradition, the water crisis in this area has reduced and the ground water level is also increasing.
Friends, if the same sense of duty comes in everyone’s mind, the biggest of challenges related to water crisis can be solved. Come, let us take a pledge to conserve water and save life in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav of freedom. We will save water drop by drop and save every single life.
My dear countrymen, you must have seen that a few days ago I held ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ with my young friends and students. During this discussion some students said that they are afraid of maths in the exam. A similar thought was also sent to me by many students in their messages. At that very moment I had decided that I would definitely discuss mathematics this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Friends, Mathematics is such a subject about which we Indians should be most comfortable. After all, the people of India have given the most research and contribution to the whole world regarding mathematics. You must have heard a lot about zero, that is, the discovery of zero and its importance. Often you will also hear that if zero was not discovered, then perhaps we would not have been able to see so much scientific progress in the world. From Calculus to Computers – all these scientific inventions are based on Zero. Mathematicians and scholars of India have even written that –
यत किंचित वस्तु तत सर्वं, गणितेन बिना नहि !
That is, whatever is there in this entire universe, everything is based on mathematics. If you remember the study of science, you will understand its meaning. Every principle of science is expressed through a mathematical formula. Be it Newton’s laws, Einstein’s famous equation, all the science related to the universe is mathematics. Now scientists also discuss Theory of Everything, that is, a single formula that can express everything in the universe. Our sages have always imagined such an expansion of scientific understanding with the help of mathematics. If we invented zero, we have also expressed infinityas well. In common parlance, when we talk about numbers and numbers, we speak and think till million, billion and trillion, but, in Vedas and in Indian mathematics, this calculation goes much further. We have a very old verse here –
एकं दशं शतं चैव, सहस्रम् अयुतं तथा |
लक्षं च नियुतं चैव, कोटि: अर्बुदम् एव च ||
वृन्दं खर्वो निखर्व: च, शंख: पद्म: च सागर: |
अन्त्यं मध्यं परार्ध: च, दश वृद्ध्या यथा क्रमम् ||
The order of numbers is given in this verse. such as –
One, ten, hundred, thousand and ayut!
Lakh, Niyut and Koti i.e. crores.
Similarly this number goes up to the shankh, padma and saagar. One saagar means 10 to the power of 57. Not only this, there are numbers like Ogh and Mahog even after this. There is a Mahogha –10 to the power of 62, that is, 62 zeros next to one. Even if we imagine such a large number in the mind, it is difficult, but, in Indian mathematics, they have been used for thousands of years. Just a few days ago I met the CEO of Intel company. He had given me a painting, in which one such Indian method of calculation or measurement was depicted through Vamana avatar. With reference to the name Intel, the computer would have come automatically to your mind. You must have also heard about the binary system in the language of computer, butDo you know that in our country there were sages like Acharya Pingala, who postulated the binary. Similarly, from mathematicians Aryabhatta to  Ramanujan, there has been work on many principles of mathematics here.
Friends, Mathematics has never been a difficult subject for us Indians, a big reason for this is our Vedic Mathematics. The credit of Vedic mathematics in modern times goes to Shri Bharati Krishna Tirtha Ji Maharaj. He revived the ancient methods of calculation and named it Vedic Mathematics. The most important thing about Vedic Mathematics was that through it you can do even the most difficult calculations in your mind in the blink of an eye. You must have seen videos of many such youths learning and teaching Vedic maths on social media these days.
Friends, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ a similar friend who teaches Vedic Mathematics is also joining us. This is Gaurav Tekriwal ji of Kolkata. And for the last two-and-a-half decades, he has been taking this movement of Vedic mathematics forward with great dedication. Come, let’s talk to him.
Modi ji – Gaurav ji Namaste!
Gaurav –Namaste sir!
Modi ji – I have heard that you are very interested in Vedic Maths; you do a lot. So, first I would like to know something about you and later, how you are interested in this subject, do tell me?
Gaurav – Sir, when I was applying for business school twenty years ago, it used to have a competitive exam called CAT. There were many maths questions in it, which had to be done in little time. So, my mother brought me a book called Vedic Mathematics. Swami Shri Bharatikrishna Tirtha Ji Maharaj had written that book. And in that he gave 16 sutras. In which mathematics used to be very simple and very fast. When I read that, I was very inspired and then my interest was awakened in Mathematics. I understood that this subject, which is a gift of India, which is our heritage, can be taken to every corner of the world. Since then I made it a mission to take Vedic Mathematics to every nook and corner of the world. Because the fear of mathematics haunts everyone. And what can be simpler than Vedic Mathematics!
Modi ji – Gaurav ji for how many years have you been working in this?
Gaurav –It has been almost 20 years sir. I am still at it.
Modi ji – And what do you do for awareness, what experiments do you use, how do you reach people?
Gaurav – We go to schools, we give online education. The name of our organization is Vedic Maths Forum India. Under that organization, we teach Vedic Maths 24 hours a day through the internet, Sir!
Modi ji – Gaurav ji, you know, I also like to interact with children constantly and I keep looking for opportunities. And with exam warrior, I have institutionalized it in a way and I have also experienced that when I talk to children, they run away as soon as they hear the name of maths. And so, my effort is that this fear which is without any reason should be removed, this fear should be removed withbasic techniques of mathematics which come from our traditions and which are not new to India.Perhaps, among the ancient traditions in the world India has a tradition of mathematics. Soif the exam warrior’s fear has to be dispelled, what will you advise them?
Gaurav – Sir, this is most useful for children, because, the fear of exams which has become a fobia in every home. Children take tuition for the exam, parents are worried. Teachers also get upset. So all this gets dissipates with Vedic maths. Vedic maths is fifteen hundred percent faster than this simple maths and it gives a lot of confidence in the children and the mind also runs faster. As such, we have also introduced Yoga with Vedic Mathematics. So that if the children want, they can calculate even with their eyes closed by the method of Vedic mathematics.
Modi ji – Even in the tradition of dhyan, doing mathematics in this way is also a primary course of meditation.
Gaurav – Right Sir!
Modi ji – Well Gaurav ji, it is very nice that you and I have taken up this work in mission mode and especially your mother took you on this path as a good guru. And today you are taking millions of children on that path. My best wishes to you
Gaurav – Thank you sir! I thank you sir! That you gave importance to Vedic maths and chose me sir! So we are very thankful.
Modi ji – Thank you very much. Namaskar.
Gaurav – Namaste sir.
Friends, Gaurav ji has very well explained how Vedic maths can transform mathematicsfrom complex to fun. Not only this, you can also solve big scientific problems with Vedic mathematics. I would like all parents to teach Vedic maths to their children. With this, their confidence will not only increase; the analytical power of their brain will also increase and yes, whatever little fear some children have about Mathematics, that phobia will also end completely.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, many informative topics from museum to maths were discussed. All these topics become part of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ only because of your suggestions. Similarly, keep sending me your suggestions in future also through Namo App and MyGov. In the coming days, we will have the festival of Eid in the country. Akshaya Tritiya and the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Parashuram will also be celebrated on 3rd May. A few days later, the festival of Vaishakh Budh Purnima will also come. All these festivals are festivals of restraint, purity, charity and harmony. Advance greetings to all of you on the occasion of these festivals. Celebrate these festivals with great gaiety and harmony. In the midst of all this, you also have to be alert of Corona. Wearing a mask, washing hands at regular intervals, whatever are the necessary measures for prevention, keep following them. Next time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we will meet again and discuss some more new topics sent by you – till then let’s bid goodbye.
Thank you very much!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
Today once again through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I have got an opportunity to meet you all; millions of my family members. I welcome all of you to ‘Mann Ki Baat’. A few days ago, the country has made an achievement, which inspires all of us… instills a new confidence in India’s prowess. You must be feeling happy on hearing of the century of a batsman of Team India on the cricket field. But, India has scored a century in another field and it is very special. On the 5th of this month, the number of unicorns in the country has reached the figure of 100 and you surely know that a unicorn is a start-up worth at least seven and a half thousand crore rupees. The total valuation of these Unicorns is more than 330 billion dollars, that is, more than 25 lakh crore rupees. Certainly, this is a matter of pride for every Indian. You will also be surprised to know that out of our total unicorns, forty four came up last year. Not only that, 14 more Unicorns were formed anew in 3-4 months this year. This means that even in this phase of the global pandemic, our start-ups have been creating wealth and value. The average annual growth rate of Indian Unicorns is more than those of USA, UK and many other countries. Analysts also say that in the coming years there will be a sharp spike in these numbers. The good thing is that our Unicorns are diversifying. They are operating in many fields like E-commerce, Fin-Tech, Ed-Tech, Bio-Tech. Another thing which I consider more important is that the world of start-ups is reflecting the spirit of New India. Today, India’s start-up ecosystem is not limited to just big cities; entrepreneurs are emerging from smaller cities and towns as well. This shows that in India, the one who has an innovative idea, can create wealth.
Friends, behind this success of the country, the youth-power of the land, the talent and the government here, all are putting in efforts together… everyone is contributing. But, another thing that is important in the world of Start-Ups is, right mentoring, that is, right guidance. A good mentor can take a start-up to new heights… can guide the founders in every way toward the right decision. I am proud that there are many such mentors in India who have dedicated themselves to promote Start-ups.
Sridhar Vembu ji has recently received the Padma Award. He himself is a successful entrepreneur, but now he has also taken up upon himself the task of grooming other entrepreneurs. Shridhar ji has started his work from a rural area. He is encouraging the rural youth to do something in this area, staying in the village itself. We also have people like Madan Padaaki who had created a platform named One-Bridge in 2014 to promote rural entrepreneurs. Today, One-Bridge is present in more than 75 districts of southern and eastern India. More than 9000 rural entrepreneurs associated with it are providing their services to rural consumers. Meera Shenoy ji is also one such example. She is doing remarkable work in the field of Market Linked Skills Training for rural, tribal and disabled youth. I have mentioned only a few names here, but today there is no dearth of mentors among us. It is a matter of great happiness for us that today a complete support system is evolving in the country for start-ups. I am sure that in the times to come, we will get to see a new flight of progress in the start-up world of India.
Friends, a few days ago I found an interesting and attractive thing which is full of colours of the creativity of the countrymen and their artistic talent. It is a gift sent to me by Self-Help Group from Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu. This gift bears the fragrance of Indianness and the blessings of Matri-Shakti – a glimpse of her affection for me. This is a special Thanjavur Doll, which also has a GI Tag. I offer special thanks to the Thanjavur Self-Help Group for sending me this gift imbued in the local culture. In a way, friends, this Thanjavur Doll besides being beautiful that it is, is also scripting a new saga of women empowerment. Women’s Self-Help Groups stores and kiosks are also opening up in Thanjavur. Because of this, the lives of many poor families have changed. With the help of such kiosks and stores, women are now able to sell their products directly to the customers. The initiative has been named
‘Tharagaigal Kaivinai
Porutkal
Virpanai
Angadi’
. The special thing is that 22 Self-Help Groups are associated with this initiative. You would also be happy to know that these stores of Women Self Help Groups have opened at very prime locations in Thanjavur. Women themselves are taking full responsibility of their upkeep as well. Apart from GI products like Thanjaur Doll and Bronze Lamp , these women Self Help Groups, also craft toys, mats and artificial jewellery. Due to such stores, the sales of GI products as well as handicraft products have seen a significant rise. Through this campaign, not only have the artisans got a fillip, but the women are also getting empowered by a rise in their income. I also urge the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’… find out which Women Self Help Groups are working in your area. You should also collect information about their products and use these products as much as possible. By doing this, you will not only help in increasing the income of the Self Help Groups, but will also give impetus to the ‘Self-reliant India Campaign’.
Friends, our country is a rich treasure house  of many languages, scripts and dialects. Varied attire, cuisine and culture in different regions is our hallmark. As a nation this diversity strengthens us and keeps us united. I wish to share with all of you a very inspiring example related to this, which is that of beti Kalpana, . Her name is Kalpana, but her endeavor is full of the true spirit of ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’. Actually, Kalpana has recently passed her class 10th examination in Karnataka, but, the very special thing about her success is that, Kalpana did not know Kannada language till some time ago. She not only learned Kannada language in three months, but also proved it by scoring 92 marks. You might be surprised to know this, but it is true. There are many other things about her that will amaze you and will also inspire you. Kalpana is originally from Joshimath in Uttarakhand. She had been suffering from TB earlier and when she was in the class three she lost her eyesight too, but, as they say, ‘where there is a will, there is a way’. Kalpana later came in contact with Professor Taramurthy, a resident of Mysuru, who not only encouraged her but also helped her in every way. Today, through her hard work, she has set an example for all of us. I congratulate Kalpana for her fortitude. Similarly, there are many people in our country who are working towards strengthening the linguistic diversity of the country. One such friend Shripati Tudu ji hails from Purulia in West Bengal. Tudu ji is a professor of Santhali language at Sidho-Kaano-Birsa University, Purulia. He has prepared a version of the country’s Constitution in his native ‘Ol Chiki’ script for the Santhali community. Shripati Tudu ji asserts that our Constitution makes every citizen of our country aware of one’s rights and duties. Therefore, it is important for every citizen to be familiar with it. Therefore, he prepared a copy of the constitution in his own script for the Santhali community and offered it as a gift. I appreciate this thinking of Shripati ji and his efforts. This is a living example of the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat Shrestha Bharat’. You will also find information about many such efforts furthering this spirit, on the website of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. Here you will get to know about activities on many such subjects including food, art, culture, tourism. You can also take part in these activities, this will give you information about your country, and you will also experience the diversity of the country.
My dear countrymen, the holy pilgrimage of ‘Char-Dham’ in Uttarakhand is currently underway in our country. Thousands of devotees are reaching every day at ‘Char-Dham’ and especially in Kedarnath. People are sharing happy experiences of their ‘Char-Dham Yatra’. But, I have also seen that some devotees are also very sad because of the filth being spread by some pilgrims in Kedarnath. Many people have expressed their views on social media as well. Going on a holy pilgrimage and coming across a heap of filth there is not right. But friends, in the midst of these complaints, one is getting to see many good pictures too. Where there is faith, there is also creation and positivity. There are many devotees who are worshiping in the Dham of Baba Kedar, as well as performing the sadhna of cleanliness. Some are cleaning near the place of stay, while others are cleaning garbage along the travel route. Many organizations and voluntary organizations are also working there along with the Swachh Bharat campaign team. Friends, just as a pilgrimage is important here; equally important is ‘teertha sewa’ as has been mentioned and I would also say that without ‘teertha sewa’, a pilgrimage is also incomplete. There are many people in Devbhoomi Uttarakhand who are engaged in the ‘sadhana’ of cleanliness and service. You will be greatly inspired by Shriman Manoj Bainjwal hailing form Rudra Prayag. For the last 25 years, Manoj ji has taken it upon himself to look after the environment. Apart from running the campaign of cleanliness, he is also engaged in making holy places plastic free. While, Surendra Bagwadi ji hailing from Guptkashi  has also made cleanliness his life mantra. In  Guptkashi, he regularly runs cleanliness programmes, and, I have learned that he has also named this campaign as ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Similarly, Champa Devi from village Devar has been teaching waste management to women of the village. Champa ji has planted hundreds of trees and through sheer hard work she has set up a stretch of forest full of greenery. Friends, through the efforts of such people the divinity of Dev Bhoomi and holy places has been maintained…We go there to experience it, so it is our responsibility to maintain this divinity and spirituality. Along with ‘Chardham Yatra’ in our country, there will be many yatras like ‘Amarnath Yatra’, ‘Pandharpur Yatra’ and ‘Jagannath Yatra’ in the coming times. In the month of Sawan, some fair or the other is held, perhaps in every village.
Friends, wherever we go, let us maintain the dignity of these pilgrimage sites. Purity, cleanliness and a pious environment… we should never forget these and for that, it is imperative that we abide by the resolution of cleanliness. A few days later, the world will celebrate the 5
th
of June as  ‘Environment Day’. We should run positive  environment campaigns around us and this is a never ending task. This time, you should join everyone together – you should certainly make some effort for cleanliness and tree plantation. Plant a tree yourself and inspire others too.
My dear countrymen, next month on the 21
st
of June, we are going to celebrate the 8th ‘International Yoga Day’. This time the theme of ‘Yoga Day’ is – Yoga for Humanity. I would urge all of you to celebrate ‘Yoga Day’ with great enthusiasm. Yes! Also take precautions related to corona. By the way, the situation now is looking better than earlier across the whole world. On account of more and more vaccination coverage, people now are going out more than ever; therefore, a lot of preparations are also being seen all over the world for ‘Yoga Day’. The corona pandemic has made all of us realize the overarching importance of health in our lives and Yoga being a great medium in ensuring the same. People are experiencing how much physical, spiritual and intellectual well being is receiving a boost through Yoga. From the world’s top business persons to film and sports personalities, from students to common people, everyone is making yoga an integral part of one’s life. I do believe that witnessing the increasing popularity of Yoga across the world must be making you happy. Friends, this time I have come to know about some very innovative examples being held on ‘Yoga Day’ in the country and abroad. One of these is Guardian Ring – it will be a very unique programme. In this, the Movement of the Sun will be celebrated, that is, as the sun travels, we will welcome it through yoga from different parts of the earth. Indian missions in different countries will organize yoga programs at sunrise according to the local time there. The program will successively commence, following one country after another. The journey from east to west will go on continuously…and on these lines, it will proceed accordingly. Streaming of these programs will also be linked one after the other, that is, it will be a kind of relay Yoga streaming event. Do watch it.
Friends, this time keeping in mind the ‘Amrit Mahotsav’ in our country, ‘International Yoga Day’ will also be organized at 75 major places in the country. On this occasion, many organizations and countrymen are preparing to do something innovative at their own level, in their respective fields. I would urge you also this time to celebrate Yoga Day, choose any place in your city, town or village which is most special. This place can be an ancient temple and tourist center, or it could be the banks of a famous river, lake or pond. With this, along with yoga, the identity of your area will also be reinforced and tourism there will also get a boost. At present, the 100 day countdown leading to ‘Yoga Day’, is also underway; rather, programs based on personal and social efforts, have already begun three months ago. On these lines, there have been countdown programs of 100th day and 75th day in Delhi. Similarly, 50th Countdown Events were organized in Sivasagar, Assam and 25th in Hyderabad. I wish you should also start preparations for ‘Yoga Day’ on your own right now. Meet more and more people, urge everyone to join the program of ‘Yoga Day’; inspire them. I am sure that all of you will participate enthusiastically in the ‘Yoga Day’, as well as adopt yoga in your daily life.
Friends, a few days ago I had gone to Japan. Amid many of my programmes, I got a chance to meet some wonderful personalities. I want to discuss about them with you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Though they belong to Japan, they harbour amazing attachment and love for India. One of them is Hiroshi Koike ji, who is a well-known Art Director. You will be very happy to know that he has directed the Mahabharat Project. This project was started in Cambodia and it is continuing for the last 9 years. Hiroshi Koike ji performs every task in a very different way. Every year, he travels to one country in Asia and produces parts of the Mahabharata with local artists and musicians there. Through this project, he has done productions and given stage performances in nine countries including India, Cambodia and Indonesia. Hiroshi Koike-ji brings together artists who have had a diverse background in Classical and Traditional Asian Performing Art. Because of that, different hues are seen in his work. Performers from Indonesia, Thailand, Malaysia and Japan make it more attractive through Java dance, Balinese dance, Thai dance. The special thing is that in this each performer speaks in his own mother tongue and the choreography very beautifully displays this diversity and the diversity of music makes this production more lively. Their aim is to bring to the fore the importance of Diversity and Co-existence in our society and what peace should really be like. Besides them, the other two people I met in Japan are Atsushi Matsuo-ji and Kenji Yoshi-ji. Both of them are associated with TEM Production Company. This company is associated with the Japanese Animation Film based on Ramayana that was released in 1993. This project was associated with Japan’s very famous film director Yugo Sako Ji. About 40 years ago, in 1983, he came to know about Ramayana for the first time. ‘Ramayana’ touched his heart, after which he started researching deeply on it. Not only that, he read 10 versions of Ramayana in Japanese language, and not only did he stop at this, he also wanted to showcase it through animation. In this, Indian animators also helped him a lot, he was guided about the Indian customs and traditions shown in the film. He was told how people in India wear the dhoti, how they wear the saree, how they groom their hair… How children respect each other within the family, what the tradition of blessing is!  Waking up in the morning, offering salutation to the elders of the household, seeking their blessings – all these things! Now, after 30 years this animation film is being re-mastered in 4K. This project is likely to be completed soon. People living thousands of kilometers away from us in Japan, who don’t know our language, who don’t know much about our traditions, their dedication to our culture, this reverence, this respect, is very commendable – which Indian would not be proud of that!
My dear countrymen, the mantra of serving the society by rising above the self, is a part of our values, our sanskar. Countless people in our country are making this mantra their life goal. I came to know about Ram Bhupal Reddy ji, a friend living in Markapuram, Andhra Pradesh. You will be surprised to know that Ram Bhupal Reddy ji has donated all his earnings after retirement for the education of daughters. He got accounts opened for about 100 daughters under ‘Sukanya Samridhi Yojana’, and deposited more than 25 lakhs in it. Another example of such service is of  Kachora village of Agra in U.P. There was a shortage of fresh water in this village for many years. Meanwhile, Kunwar Singh, a farmer of the village found water in his field 6-7 km away from the village. It was a matter of great joy for him. He thought… why not serve all the other villagers too with this water! But, 30-32 lakh rupees were needed to transport the water from the farm to the village. After some time, Kunwar Singh’s younger brother Shyam Singh came to the village after retiring from the army, and he came to know about it. He handed over all his money received on retirement for this work and by laying a pipeline from the farm to the village; he supplied fresh water to the villagers. If there is dedication, seriousness towards one’s duties, how even a single person can change the future of the whole society, this endeavor is a big inspiration. Only by walking on the path of duty can we empower the society; empower the country. In this Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav’, this should be our resolution and this should also be our sadhana….which has only one path – duty, duty and duty.
My dear countrymen, today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we discussed many important topics related to society. All of you send important suggestions related to different topics to me, and on the basis of them our discussion moves forward. Don’t forget to send your suggestions for the next edition of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. At present, the ongoing programs related to the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav; the events in which you are participating… do let me know about them. I look forward to your suggestions on Namo app and MyGov. Next time we will meet once again… we will again talk on similar topics related to our countrymen. Take care of yourself and also take care of all the living being around you. In this summer season, you should continue to fulfill your humane responsibility of providing food and water for the animals and birds…Do remember this. Thank you very much.
Hello my dear countrymen Namaskar! I have received many letters from all of you for ‘Mann Ki Baat’; I have also received many messages on social media and NaMoApp. I am very thankful to you for that. In this program, it is our endeavour to discuss each other’s inspiring efforts; to tell the story of change through mass movement to the entire country. In this episode, I want to discuss with you today one such mass movement of the country, that holds great importance in the life of every citizen of the country. But, before that I want to ask a question to the youth of today’s generation, to the youth in the age group of 24-25 years, and the question is very serious… do ponder my question over. Did you know that when your parents were your age, once even their right to life was snatched away from them? You must be thinking how could have this happened? This is just impossible! But my young friends, this had happened once in our country. This took place years ago in 1975. It was the month of June when emergency was imposed. In that, all the rights were taken away from the citizens of the country. One amongst those rights was the ‘Right to Life and Personal Liberty’ provided to all Indians under Article 21 of the Constitution. At that time an attempt was made to crush the democracy of India. The country’s courts, every constitutional institution, the press, were put under control. The condition of censorship was such that nothing could be printed without approval. I remember when famous singer Kishore Kumar refused to applaud the government, he was banned. His entry on the radio was done away with. But even after many attempts, thousands of arrests, and atrocities on lakhs of people, the faith of the people of India in democracy did not shake… not at all! For us, the people of India, the sanskars ​​of democracy which we have been carrying on for centuries; the democratic spirit which is in our veins, finally won. The people of India got rid of the emergency and re-established democracy in a democratic way. It is difficult to find such an example of defeating a dictatorial mindset, a dictatorial tendency in a democratic way, in the whole world. During the Emergency, I had the good fortune to have been a witness; to be a partner in the struggle of the countrymen – as a soldier of democracy. Today, when the country is celebrating 75 years of its independence, celebrating Amrit Mahotsav, we should never forget that dreadful period of emergency. The generations to come should also not forget. The Amrit Mahotsav not only encompasses the victory saga of freedom from hundreds of years of slavery, but also the journey of 75 years after independence. We move forward, learning from every important stage of history.
My dear countrymen, there is hardly any of us who, in one’s life, has not had fantasies pertaining to the sky. During one’s childhood, stories of the moon and stars in the sky attract everyone. For the youth, touching the sky is synonymous with making dreams come true. Today, when our India is touching the sky of success in so many fields, how can the skies, or space, remain untouched by it! In the past few years, many big feats related to the space sector have been accomplished in our country. One of these achievements of the country has been the creation of an agency named In-Space… an agency that is promoting new opportunities in the space sector for the private sector of India. This beginning has especially attracted the youth of our country. I have received messages related to this from many young people.
A few days ago when I had gone to dedicate to the people the headquarters of In-Space, I saw the ideas and enthusiasm of many young start-ups. I also talked to them for a long time. You too will not be able to help being surprised when you learn about them. For example, take just the number and speed of space start-ups. Till a few years ago, in our country, in the space sector, no one even thought about start-ups. Today their number is more than a hundred. All these start-ups are working on ideas, which were either not thought about earlier, or were considered impossible for the private sector. For example, Chennai and Hyderabad have two start-ups – Agnikul and Skyroot! These start-ups are developing launch vehicles that will take small payloads into space. Through this, the cost of Space Launching is estimated to come down significantly. Similarly, Dhruva Space, another Start-Up of Hyderabad, is working on High Technology Solar Panels for Satellite Deployer and Satellites. I also met Tanveer Ahmed of Digantara, another space start-up who is trying to map waste in space. I have also given him a challenge that they should evolve work technology, which can solve the problem of waste in space. Both Digantara and Dhruva Space are going to make their first launch from ISRO’s launch vehicle on the 30th of June. Similarly, Neha, the founder of Astrome, a space start-up based in Bangalore, is also working on an amazing idea. This start-up is making such flat antennas which will not only be small, but their cost will also be very low. Demand for this technology can be all over the world.
Friends, in the program of In-Space, I also met beti Tanvi Patel, a school student of Mehsana. She is working on a very small satellite, which is going to be launched in space in the next few months. Tanvi told me about her work very simply in Gujarati. Like Tanvi, about seven hundred and fifty school students in the country are working on 75 such satellites in the Amrit Mahotsav, and it is also a matter of joy that, most of these students are from small towns of the country.
Friends, these are the same youth, in whose mind the image of the space sector was like a secret mission a few years ago, but, the country undertook space reforms, and the same youth are now launching their own satellites. When the youth of the country is ready to touch the sky, how can our country be left behind?
My dear countrymen, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, let’s now talk about a topic that will delight your mind and inspire you as well. Recently, our Olympic gold medalist Neeraj Chopra was again in the headlines. Even after the Olympics, he is setting new records of success, one after the other. Neeraj won the silver at Paavo Nurmi Games in Finland. Not only that, He also broke the record of his own Javelin Throw. Neeraj once again made the country proud by winning the gold in Kuortane Games. He won this gold in conditions when the weather there was also inclement. This zest is the hallmark of today’s youth. From Start-Ups to the Sports World, the youth of India are making new records. In the recently held Khelo India Youth Games too, our players set many records. You would love to know that a total of 12 records have been broken in these games – not only that, 11 records have been registered in the names of female players. M. Martina Devi of Manipur has made eight records in weightlifting.
Similarly, Sanjana, Sonakshi and Bhavna have also made different records. With their hard work, these players have proven how much India’s prestige is going to rise in international sports arena in the coming times. I also congratulate all these players and wish them all the best for the future.
Friends, there has been another special feature of Khelo India Youth Games. This time too many such talents have emerged, who are from very ordinary families. These players have struggled a lot in their lives to reach this stage of success. In their success, their family, and parents too, have had a big role to play.
Father of Adil Altaf from Srinagar, who won the gold in 70 km cycling, does tailoring work, but, has left no stone unturned to fulfill his son’s dreams. Today Adil has brought pride to his father and the entire Jammu-Kashmir. Gold winner L. Dhanush’s father is a carpenter in Chennai. Sangli’s daughter Kajol Sargar’s father works as a tea vendor. Kajol would help her father and practice weight lifting as well. This hard work of hers and her family paid off and Kajol has won a lot of accolades in weight lifting. Tanu of Rohtak has performed a similar kind of miracle. Tanu’s father Rajbir Singh is a school bus driver in Rohtak. By winning the gold medal in wrestling, Tanu has realized her own, her family’s and her father’s dream.
Friends, in the sports world, now, the dominance of Indian players is increasing; at the same time, a new image of Indian sports is also emerging. For example, in Khelo India Youth Games, besides disciplines that are in Olympics, five indigenous sports, were also included this time. These five sports are – Gatka, Thang Ta, Yogasan, Kalaripayattu and Mallakhamb.
Friends, there is going to be an international tournament of a game which was born centuries ago in our own country…in India. This is the event of Chess Olympiad beginning from the 28th July. This time, more than 180 countries are participating in the Chess Olympiad. Today’s discussion of sports and fitness cannot be complete without another name – this is the name of Telangana’s mountaineer Poorna Malavath. By completeing the 7 summit challenge Poorna has added another feather in her cap of success. The seven summit challenge…that is the challenge of surmounting seven most difficult and highest mountain peaks. With her indomitable spirit, Purva ascended the highest peak of North America Mount Denali and brought honour to the counry. Poorna is the same daughter of India who had accomplished the amazing feat of done a conquering Mount Everest at the age of just 13.
Friends, when it comes to sports, today I would also like to discuss Mithali Raj, one of the most talented cricketers in India.
Just this month, she has announced her retirement from cricket which has emotionally moved many sports lovers. Mithali has not only been an extraordinary player, but has also been an inspiration to many players. I wish Mithali all the very best for her future.
My dear countrymen, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have been discussing the successful efforts related to ‘waste to wealth’. One such example is that of Aizwal, the capital of Mizoram. There is a beautiful river ‘Chitte Lui’ in Aizwal, which due to neglect for years, had turned into a heap of dirt and garbage. Efforts have started in the last few years to save this river. For this, local agencies, voluntary organizations and local people, together, are also running the Save Chitte Lui action plan. This campaign of cleaning the river has also made an opportunity for wealth creation from waste. Actually, this river and its banks were full of plastic and polythene waste. The organization working to save the river, decided to build a road using this polythene, that is, the waste that came out of the river. From that, in a village in Mizoram, the state’s first plastic road was built… that is cleanliness and development as well.
Friends, one such effort has also been undertaken by the youth of Puducherry through their voluntary organizations. Puducherry is situated along the sea coast. A large number of people come to see the beaches and marine beauty there. But, the pollution caused by plastic was also increasing on the sea coast of Puducherry, therefore, to save its sea, beaches and ecology, people here have started the ‘Recycling for Life’ campaign. Today, thousands of kilograms of garbage is collected and segregated every day in Karaikal, Puducherry. The organic waste from that is made into compost; the rest of the matter is separated and recycled. Such efforts are not only inspiring, but also lend momentum to India’s campaign against single use plastic.
Friends, at this time when I am talking to you, a unique cycling rally is also going on in Himachal Pradesh. I want to tell you about this too. A group of cyclists have started from Shimla to Mandi carrying the message of cleanliness. These people will complete this distance of about one hundred and seventy five kilometers on mountain roads, only by cycling. There are children as well as the elderly in this group. If our environment is clean, our mountains and rivers, our seas remain clean; our health also gets better. You must keep writing me about such efforts.
My dear countrymen, monsoon is continuously progressing in our country. Rain is increasing in many states. This is also the time to make special efforts in the direction of ‘water’ and ‘water conservation’. In our country, for centuries, this responsibility has been taken by the society together. You will remember, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we once discussed the legacy of step wells. The Baolis are those big wells which are reached by descending stairs. In Udaipur, Rajasthan, there is one such stepwell which is hundreds of years old – ‘Sultan Ki Baoli’. It was built by Rao Sultan Singh, but due to neglect, gradually this place has become deserted and has turned into a pile of garbage. One day some youths roaming around reached this stepwell and were very sad to see its condition. At that very moment these youths resolved to change the picture and destiny of Sultan Ki Baoli. They named this mission of their – ‘Sultan se Sur-Tan’. You must be wondering, what is this ‘Sur Tan! In fact, with their efforts, these youths have not only rejuvenated the step well, but have also linked it to the notes and melody of the music. After cleaning the Sultan’s stepwell, after decorating it, takes place a program of harmony and music. There is so much talk of this change, that many people from abroad have started coming to see it. The most important thing about this successful effort is that the youth who started the campaign are chartered accountants. Coincidentally, a few days from now, July 1 is observed as chartered accountants day. I congratulate all the CAs of the country in advance. We can create a similar sense of awareness about our water bodies by connecting them with music and other social programs. Water conservation is actually life conservation. You must have seen, nowadays, how many ‘river festivals’ are being held! Whichever water sources are there in your cities, you must organize one event or the other.
My dear countrymen, our Upanishads mention about a life mantra- ‘Charaiveti-Charaiveti-Charaiveti’- you must have heard this mantra too. It means – keep going, keep going. This mantra is so popular in our country because it is part of our nature to keep moving, to be dynamic; to keep moving. As a nation, we have come this far through a journey of development spanning thousands of years. As a society, we have always moved ahead by accepting new ideas, new changes. Our cultural mobility and travels have contributed a lot in this. That is why our sages and saints had entrusted us with spiritual responsibilities like pilgrimage. All of us go on varied pilgrimages. You must have seen that this time a large number of devotees participated in the Chardham Yatra. In our country, from time to time, different Dev-yatras also take place. Dev Yatras… that is, in which not only the devotees but also our Gods go on a journey. In just a few days from now on the 1st of July, the famous journey of Lord Jagannath is going to commence. All of us are familiar with the Puri yatra in Odisha. People make efforts to ensure that on this occasion they get the good fortune of going to Puri. In other states too, Jagannath Yatras are taken out with great gaiety and fervour. Bhagwan Jagannath Yatra begins on Dwitiya, the second day of the month of Ashadha. In our texts ‘Ashadhasya Dwitiya divase… Rath Yatra’, this is how the description is found in Sanskrit shlokas. In Ahmedabad, Gujrat too, every year Rath Yatra begins from Ashadh Dwitiya. I was in Gujarat, so I also used to get the privilege of serving in this Yatra every year. Ashadha Dwitiya, also known as Ashadhi Bij, marks the beginning of the new year of Kutch on this day. I also wish Happy New Year to all my Kutchi brothers and sisters. For me this day is also very special – I remember, a day before Ashadha Dwitiya, that is, on the first Tithi of Ashadha, we started a Sanskrit festival in Gujarat, which comprises songs, music and cultural programs in Sanskrit language. The name of this event is – ‘Ashadhasya Pratham Diwase’. There is also a reason behind giving this special name to the festival. Actually, the great Sanskrit poet Kalidas wrote the Meghdootam on the arrival of rain from the month of Ashadh. There is a verse in Meghdootam – Ashadhasya Pratham Diwase, Megham Ashlishta Sanum, that is, mountain peaks covered with clouds on the first day of Ashadha, this verse became the basis of this event.
Friends, be it Ahmedabad or Puri, Lord Jagannath also gives us many deep human messages through this journey. Bhagwan Jagannath is the lord of the world, but the poor and downtrodden have a special participation in his journey. God also walks along with every section and person of the society. Similarly, in all the journeys that take place in our country, there is no such distinction between poor and rich, high and low. Rising above all discrimination, the journey itself is paramount. As you must have heard about the Yatra of Pandharpur in Maharashtra…. In the Pandharpur Yatra, one is neither big nor small. Everyone is a Varkari, a servant of Bhagwan Vitthal. Just 4 days later,the Amarnath Yatra is also going to start from the 30th of June. Devotees from all over the country reach Jammu Kashmir for the Amarnath Yatra. The local people of Jammu Kashmir take the responsibility of this Yatra with equal reverence, and cooperate with the pilgrims.
Friends, the Sabarimala Yatra has the same importance in the South. This pilgrimage to seek Darshan of Bhagwan Ayyappa on the hills of Sabarimala has been going on from the times when this path was completely surrounded by forests. Even today, when people go on these yatras, how many opportunities are created for the poor… from religious rituals to lodging arrangements… that is, these yatras directly give us an opportunity to serve the poor and are equally beneficial to them. That is why the country, too, is now making many efforts to increase the facilities for the devotees in their spiritual journeys. If you too go on such a journey, you will also have a glance of Ek Bharat- Shreshtha Bharat along with spirituality.
My dear countrymen, as always, this time also it was a very pleasant experience to connect with all of you through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. We discussed the successes and achievements of the countrymen. In the midst of all this, we also have to take precautions against Corona. However, it is a matter of satisfaction that today the country has a comprehensive protective shield of a vaccine. We have reached close to 200 crore vaccine doses. Precaution dose is also being rapidly administered in the country. If it is time for a precaution dose after your second dose, then you must take this third dose. Make your family members, especially the elderly, take a precautionary dose. We also have to take necessary precautions like hand hygiene and masks. We also have to be alert of the diseases caused by the surrounding filth during the rainy season. All of you stay alert, stay healthy and keep moving forward with similar positive energy. We’ll meet again next month, until then, many many thanks. Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
This is the 91st episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Earlier we have talked about so many things, shared our views on myriad topics, but, this time ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is very special. The reason for this is Independence Day this time, when India will complete 75 years of her independence. We are all going to be witness to a splendid and historic moment. The Almighty has blessed us with this great fortune. Think about it… had we been born in the era of slavery, then how would have we imagined this day? That yearning of freedom from slavery, the desperation for freedom from the shackles of subjugation – how formidable it must have been! Those days, when, every single day, we would be seeing millions of countrymen fighting, battling, making sacrifices for the sake of freedom. Then we would wake up every morning with this dream of when my India would be free…. and maybe that day would dawn in our lives when we would dedicate our lives to the generations to come, chanting Vande Mataram and Bharat Maa Ki Jai, spending our youth for the cause.
Friends, on the 31st of July i.e. today, all of us countrymen salute the martyrdom of Shaheed Udham Singh ji. I offer my humble tributes to all such other great revolutionaries who sacrificed their all for the country.
Friends, I am very happy to see that the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav is taking the form of a mass movement. People from all walks of life and from every section of the society are participating in different programs connected with it. One such event took place in Meghalaya earlier this month. People remembered the brave warrior of Meghalaya U. Tirot Singh on his death anniversary. Tirot Singh ji fiercely opposed the British conspiracy to control the Khasi Hills and destroy the culture there. Many artists gave beautiful performances in this program. They made history come alive. A carnival was also organized as part of the event, in which the great culture of Meghalaya was depicted in a beautiful manner. A few weeks ago, in Karnataka, a unique campaign named Amrita Bharathi Kannadarthi was also launched. In this, grand programs related to the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav were organized at 75 places in the state. In these, along with remembering the great freedom fighters of Karnataka, efforts were also made to bring to the fore the local literary achievements.
Friends, in this very July an interesting endeavour has been undertaken, named Azadi Ki Railgadi Aur Railway Station. The objective of this effort is to make people know the role of Indian Railways in the freedom struggle. There are many such railway stations in the country, which are associated with the history of the freedom movement. You too will be surprised to know about these railway stations. Gomoh Junction in Jharkhand is now officially known as Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose Junction Gomoh. Do you know why? Actually at this very station, Netaji Subhash was successful in dodging British officers by boarding the Kalka Mail. All of you must have heard the name of Kakori Railway Station near Lucknow. The names of bravehearts like Ram Prasad Bismil and Ashfaq Ullah Khan are associated with this station. The brave revolutionaries had displayed their might to the British by looting the treasury of the British being carried by train. Whenever you talk to the people of Tamil Nadu, you will get to know about Vanchi Maniyachchi Junction in Thoothukudi district. This station is named after Tamil freedom fighter Vanchinathan ji. This is the same place where Vanchi, 25 years of age then, had punished one British collector for his actions.
Friends, this list is pretty long. 75 such railway stations have been identified spread over 24 states across the country. These 75 stations are being decorated very ornately. Many types of programs are also being organized in these. You should also take out time to visit one such historical station in your vicinity. You will get to know in detail about pages from the history of the freedom movement that you have not been aware of. I urge the students of the nearby school, and the teachers to take the small children of their school to the station and narrate the whole chain of events to those children, explaining them.
My dear countrymen, under the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, from the 13th to the 15th of August, a special movement – ​​’Har Ghar Tiranga- Har Ghar Tiranga’ is being organized. By becoming a part of this movement, from August 13 to 15, you must hoist the tricolor at your home, or adorn your home with it. The Tricolor connects us, inspires us to do something for the country. I also have a suggestion that from the 2nd of August to the 15th of August, all of us can place the tricolor in our social media profile pictures. By the way, do you know, 2nd of August also has a special connection with our tricolor. This day is the birth anniversary of Pingali Venkaiah ji who designed our national flag. I pay my respectful homage to him. Talking about our national flag, I will also remember the great revolutionary Madam Cama. Her role in shaping the Tricolor has been very important.
Friends, the biggest message that emerges from all these events being organized in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav is that all of us countrymen should follow our duty with full devotion. Only then will we be able to fulfill the dream of those countless freedom fighters… and to build the India of their dreams. That is why this Amrit Kaal of our next 25 years is Kartavyakaal, a period of duty for every countryman.
To liberate the country, our brave fighters had given us this responsibility, and we have to fulfill it fully.
My dear countrymen, the fight of our countrymen against Corona is still on. The whole world is still struggling today. The increasing interest of people in Holistic Healthcare has helped everyone a lot in this. We all know how useful Indian traditional methods are in this. In the fight against Corona, AYUSH has played an important role, at the global level. There is a growing interest in Ayurveda and Indian medicine around the world. This is one of the major reasons why Ayush Exports have witnessed a record growth and it is also a matter of joy that many new start-ups are also emerging in this sector. Recently, a Global Ayush Investment and Innovation Summit was held. You will be surprised to know that in this, investment proposals of about ten thousand crore rupees have been received. Another very important happening during the corona period is that, there has been a lot of increase in research on medicinal plants. Many research studies are being published on this. It is definitely a good start.
Friends, another great effort has been made in the country in the field of varied medicinal plants and herbs. The Indian Virtual Herbarium was just launched in the month of July. It is also an example of how we can use the digital world to connect with our roots. The Indian Virtual Herbarium is an interesting collection of digital images of preserved plants or plant parts, which is freely available on the web. More than one lakh Specimens and Scientific Information related to them are available on this Virtual Herbarium. In the Virtual Herbarium, a rich picture of the Botanical Diversity of India is also visible. I am sure the Indian Virtual Herbarium will become an important resource for research on Indian flora.
My dear countrymen, every time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we discuss successes of the countrymen which bring smiles to our faces. If a success story spreads sweet smiles, and also tastes sweet, you will certainly call it icing on the cake. These days our farmers are performing similar wonders in the production of honey. The sweetness of honey is also changing the lives of our farmers, increasing their income. In Yamunanagar, Harayana, there lives a beekeeper friend- Subhash Kamboj ji. Subhash ji underwent training in beekeeping in a scientific way. After that he started his work with just six boxes. Today he is engaged in beekeeping using about two thousand boxes. His honey is supplied across many states. Vinod Kumar ji is also beekeeping in more than one and a half thousand colonies in Palli village of Jammu. He has undertaken training in rearing the queen bee last year. Through this work, he is earning 15 to 20 lakh rupees annually. There is another farmer from Karnataka – Madhukeshwar Hegde ji. Madhukeshwar ji says that he had availed of subsidy from the Government of India for 50 bee colonies. Today he possesses over 800 colonies, and sells tons of honey. He brought in innovation in his work, and is also making botanical honey like Jamun honey, Tulsi honey and Amla honey. Madhukeshwar ji, your innovation and success in madhu, honey production also makes your name meaningful.
Friends, you all know how much importance has been given to honey in our traditional health science. In Ayurveda texts, honey has been described as an elixir. Honey, not only imparts taste ; it also gives us health. There are so many possibilities in honey production today that even the youth pursuing professional studies are making it a source of self-employment. One such youth is –Nimit Singh of Gorakhpur,U.P. Nimit ji has done B.Tech. His father is also a doctor, but after his studies, instead of a job, Nimit ji decided to be self-employed. He started honey production. He also got his own lab set up in Lucknow for quality check. Nimit ji is now earning well from honey and Bee Wax, and is also training farmers, going to different states. Due to the hard work of such youth, today the country is becoming such a big honey producer. You will be happy to know that the export of honey from the country has also increased. The country started campaigns like National Beekeeping and Honey Mission, farmers worked hard, and the sweetness of our honey started reaching across the world. There are still huge possibilities in this field. I would like our youth to join these opportunities and take advantage of them and realize new possibilities.
My dear countrymen, I have received a letter from a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Shriman Ashish Bahl ji from Himachal Pradesh. He has mentioned in his letter the ‘Minjar Mela’ of Chamba. Actually, the inflorescence of the maize plant is called Minjar. When flowers bloom on the maize, Minjar Mela is also celebrated and in this fair, tourists from all over the country come from far and wide to take part. Incidentally, the Minjar fair is also going on at this time. If you have gone to visit Himachal, you can go to Chamba to see this fair.
“Chambe Ek Din Ona Kane Mahina Raina”
That is, those who come to Chamba for a day, they stay back here for a month seeing its beauty.
Friends, fairs have also been of great cultural importance in our country. Fairs connect people and hearts. When Kharif crops ripen after the rains in Himachal in September, in Shimla, Mandi, Kullu and Solan, Sari or Sair is also celebrated. Jagra is also going to arrive in September itself. In Jagra fairs, Bisu songs are sung after invoking the deity of Mahasu. This awakening of Mahasu Devta takes place in Himachal at Shimla, Kinnaur and Sirmaur; simultaneously in Uttarakhand.
Friends, there are many traditional fairs of tribal societies in different states in our country. Some of these fairs are associated with tribal culture, while some are organized in connection with tribal history and heritage. For example, if you get a chance, you must visit the four-day Samakka-Saralamma Jatara Fair in Medaram, Telangana. This fair is called Mahakumbh of Telangana. The Saralamma Jatara Mela is celebrated in honor of two tribal women heores – Samakka and Saralamma. It is a big center of faith for the Koya tribal community, not only in Telangana, but also in Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh. The Maridamma fair in Andhra Pradesh is also a big fair connected with the beliefs of the tribal society. The Maridamma fair runs from Jyeshtha Amavasya to Ashadh Amavasya and the tribal society here associates it with Shakti upasana, worship. Here, in Peddhapuram, East Godavari, there is also a Maridamma temple. Similarly, the people of Garasiya tribe in Rajasthan organize ‘Siyawa ka Mela’ or ‘Mankhan Ro Mela’ on Vaishakh Shukla Chaturdashi.
The ‘Mawli Mela’ of Narayanpur of Bastar in Chhattisgarh is also very special. Nearby, the Bhagoria Mela of Madhya Pradesh is also very famous. It is said that the Bhagoria fair started in the times of Raja Bhoj. Then the Bhil kings, Kasumara and Balun organized these events for the first time in their respective capitals. Ever since, these fairs are being celebrated with equal enthusiasm. Similarly, many fairs like Tarnetar and Madhopur are very famous in Gujarat. Fairs are, in themselves, a great source of energy for our society, our life. There must be many such fairs around you too. In modern times, these old links of the society are very important to strengthen the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat- Shreshtha Bharat’. Our youth must join them and whenever you go to such fairs, share the pictures on social media too. You can also use a specific hashtag if you want. Through this other people will also know about those fairs. You can also upload photos on the website of the Ministry of Culture. In the next few days, the Culture Ministry is going to start a competition, where, those who send the best pictures of the fairs will also be rewarded. So do not delay, visit the fairs, share their pictures, and maybe you will get rewarded too.
My dear countrymen, you must have noticed, in one episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I had said that India has full potential to become a Powerhouse in Toys Exports. I had specially discussed the rich heritage of India in Sports and Games. The local toys of India are eco-friendly, consonant with both tradition and nature. Today I want to share with you the success of Indian Toys. Due to our Youngsters, Start-ups and Entrepreneurs, what our toy industry has achieved, the successes we have achieved, no one could have imagined. Today, when it comes to Indian toys, the echo of Vocal for Local is being heard everywhere. You will also like to know that now the number of toys coming from abroad in India is continuously decreasing. Earlier, where toys worth more than Rs 3 thousand crore used to come from outside, now their import has reduced by 70 percent and it is a matter of joy that during this period, India has exported toys worth more than two thousand six hundred crore rupees to foreign countries. Whereas earlier, only toys worth Rs 300-400 crore used to go out of India. And you already know that all this happened during the Corona period. India’s toy sector has proven its mettle by transforming itself. Indian Manufacturers are now making toys based on Indian Mythology, History and Culture. Toy clusters that are there everywhere in the country, small entrepreneurs who make toys, are getting a lot of benefit from it. The toys made by these small entrepreneurs are now going around the world. Toy manufacturers from India are also working closely with the world’s leading Global Toy Brands. I also liked that, our start-up sector is also paying full attention to the world of toys. They’re also doing a lot of fun things in this area. In Bangalore, a start-up named Shumme Toys is focusing on eco-friendly toys. In Gujarat, Arkidzoo Company is making AR-based Flash Cards and AR-based Storybooks. Pune-based company, Funvention is engaged in kindling the interest of children in Science, Technology and Maths through Learning, Toys and Activity Puzzles. I congratulate all such manufacturers, Start-ups, doing a great job in the world of toys. Let us all together make Indian toys more popular all over the world. Along with this, I would also like to urge the parents to buy more and more Indian Toys, Puzzles and Games.
Friends, be it the classroom or the playground, today our youth, in every field, are making the country proud. This month, PV Sindhu has won her first title of Singapore Open. Neeraj Chopra also continued his excellent performance and won the silver medal for the country in the World Athletics Championship. At the Ireland Para Badminton International as well, our players have boosted the glory of the country by winning 11 medals. Indian players also performed well in the World Cadet Wrestling Championship held in Rome. Our athlete Suraj has done wonders in the Greco-Roman event. He has won the Gold Medal of Wrestling in this event after a long gap of 32 years. For the players, this entire month has been full of action. It is also a great honor for India to host the 44th Chess Olympiad in Chennai. This tournament has commenced on the 28th of July and I got the privilege of attending its Opening Ceremony. Commonwealth Games also began in the UK on the same day. An Indian team, full of youthful enthusiasm is representing the country there. I extend my best wishes to all the players and athletes on behalf of the countrymen. I am also happy that India is going to host the FIFA Under 17 Women’s World Cup as well. This tournament will be held around October, which will enhance the enthusiasm of the daughters of the country towards sports.
Friends, a few days ago the results of class 10th and 12th have also been declared across the country. I congratulate all those students who have achieved success through their hard work and dedication. Due to the pandemic, the last two years have been extremely challenging. The courage and restraint shown by our youth in these circumstances is highly commendable. I wish everyone a bright future.
My dear countrymen, today we started our discussion on 75 years of Independence, with a visit across the country. The next time we meet, the journey of our next 25 years would have already begun. We all have to join for our beloved tricolor to be hoisted at our homes and those of our loved ones. Do share with me how you celebrated Independence Day, if you did anything special, this time. Next time, we will talk again about the different colors of our Amrit Parv. Till then, I take leave of you. Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar! In this month of August, all your letters, messages and cards have soaked my office in the hues of the tricolor. I have hardly come across any letter which does not carry the tricolor, or does not talk about the tricolor and Freedom. Children and young friends have sent beautiful pictures and artwork on the Amrit Mahotsav. In this month of independence, in our entire country, in every city, every village, the nectar of Amrit Mahotsav is flowing. On this special occasion of Amrit Mahotsav and Independence Day, we have seen the collective might of the country. There has been a sense of realisation. Such a big country, so many diversities, but when it came to hoisting the tricolor, everyone seemed to flow in the same spirit. People themselves came forward, becoming the vanguard of the pride of the tricolor. We had also seen the spirit of the country in the cleanliness campaign and the vaccination campaign. We are getting to witness the same spirit of patriotism again in the Amrit Mahotsav. Our soldiers hoisted the tricolor on the peaks of high mountains, on the borders of the country, and in the middle of the sea. People also came up with different innovative ideas for the tricolor campaign. Such as young friend, Krishnil Anil ji. Anil ji is a puzzle artist and has created beautiful tricolor mosaic art in record time. In Kolar, Karnataka, people presented a unique sight by holding the tricolor that was 630 feet long and 205 feet wide.
In Assam, government employees created a 20 feet tricolor with their own hands to hoist at the Dighalipukhuri War memorial. Similarly, people in Indore made the map of India through a human chain. In Chandigarh, the youth made a giant human tricolor. Both these efforts have also been recorded in the Guinness Records. In the midst of all this, a great inspirational example was also seen at the Gangot Panchayat of Himachal Pradesh. Here the children of migrant laborers were included as chief guests in the Independence Day Programme of the Panchayat.
Friends, these colors of the Amrit Mahotsav were seen not only in India, but also in other countries of the world. Local singers living in Botswana sang 75 patriotic songs to celebrate 75 years of India’s independence. What is more special in this is that these 75 songs were sung in languages ​​like Hindi, Punjabi, Gujarati, Bangla, Assamese, Tamil, Telugu, Kannada and Sanskrit. Similarly, in Namibia, a special stamp has been released on the Indo-Namibian cultural-traditional relations.
Friends, I want to share with you another thing of joy. Just a few days ago, I got an opportunity to attend a program of Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, Government of India. There, they had organised the screening of ‘Swaraj’, the Doordarshan serial. I got an opportunity to attend its premiere . This is a great initiative to acquaint the younger generation of the country with the efforts of unsung heroes and heroines who took part in the freedom movement. It is telecast every Sunday at 9 pm on Doordarshan. And I was told that is going to continue for 75 weeks. I urge you to take time out to watch it yourself and do show it to the children of the house. And people from schools-colleges can also record it and compose a special program when the school-college opens on Monday, so that a new awakening will arise in our country about these great heroes of the birth of Freedom. The Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav will continue till next year i.e. August 2023. For the country, for the freedom fighters, the writings and events that we have been organising, we have to carry them forward.
My dear countrymen, the knowledge of our forefathers, the farsightedness of our ancestors and the EkAtmaChintan, integral self realisation is so significant even today; when we go deep into it, we are filled with wonder. Our thousands of years old Rigveda! In Rigveda it is said:-
Oman-mapo manushi: amritkam dhaat tokay tanayaaya shyamyo: |
Yooyam Hisatha Bhishjo Matritama Vishwasya Sthatu: Jagato Janitri: ||
Meaning – O water, you are the best friend of humanity. You are the giver of life, food is produced from you, and from you is the well-being of our children. You are the protector of us and keep us away from all evils. You are the best medicine, and you are the sustainer of this universe.
Think about it…the importance of water and water conservation has been explained in our culture thousands of years ago. When we see this knowledge in today’s context, we are thrilled, but when the nation accepts this knowledge as its strength, then their power increases manifold. You will remember, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I had talked about Amrit Sarovar four months ago. After that, the local administration got active in different districts, voluntary organizations came together and local people connected… – and Lo & behold, the construction of Amrit Sarovars has become a mass movement. When there is a deep feeling to do something for the country, realize one’s duties, concern for the coming generations, then the capabilities also get added up, and the resolve becomes noble.
I have come to know of a brilliant effort from Warangal in Telangana. A new Gram Panchayat has been formed here, named ‘Mangtya-Valya Thanda’. This village is close to the Forest Area. There was a place near the village where a lot of water used to accumulate during monsoon. On the initiative of the villagers, this place is now being developed under the Amrit Sarovar campaign. This time due to the rains during the monsoon, this lake has been filled to the brim with water.
I also want to tell you about the Amrit Sarovar built in Mocha Gram Panchayat in Mandla, Madhya Pradesh. This Amrit Sarovar is built near the Kanha National Park and has further enhanced the beauty of this area. The newly constructed Shaheed Bhagat Singh Amrit Sarovar in Lalitpur, Uttar Pradesh is also drawing a lot of people. This lake, built in the Niwari Gram Panchayat, is spread over 4 acres. The tree plantation on the shoreline of the lake is enhancing its beauty. People are also coming from far and wide to see the 35 feet high tricolor near the lake. This campaign of Amrit Sarovars is going on in full swing in Karnataka as well. Here in the village ‘Bilkerur’ of Bagalkot district, people have built a very beautiful Amrit Sarovar. In fact, in this area, people had a lot of problems because of the water flowing down from the mountain; farmers and their crops also suffered losses. To make the Amrit Sarovar, the people of the village channelized all the water and brought it aside. This also solved the problem of floods in the area. The Amrit Sarovar Abhiyan not only solves many of our problems today; it is equally necessary for our coming generations. Under this campaign, at many places, old water bodies are also being rejuvenated. Amrit Sarovars are being used for quenching the thirst of animals as well as for farming. Due to these ponds, the ground water table of the surrounding areas has risen. At the same time, greenery is also increasing around them. Not only this, people at many places are also engaged in preparations for fish farming in Amrit Sarovars. I urge all of you, especially my young friends, to actively participate in the Amrit Sarovar campaign and lend full strength to these efforts of water conservation & water storage and take them forward.
My dear countrymen, an interesting project is being run in Bongai village of Assam – Project Sampoorna. The purpose of this project is to fight against malnutrition and the method too is very unique. Under this, the mother of a healthy child from an Anganwadi center meets the mother of a malnourished child every week and discusses all the nutrition related information. That is, one mother becomes a friend of another mother, helps her, and teaches her. With the help of this project, in this region, in one year, malnutrition has been eradicated in more than 90 percent children.
Can you imagine, whether song and music and bhajans can also be used to remove malnutrition? It was successfully used in “Mera Bachha Campaign”; the “Mera Bachha Abhiyan” in Datia district of Madhya Pradesh. Under this, bhajan-kirtans were organized in the district, in which teachers as nutrition gurus were called. A Matka program was also held, in which women bring a handful of grains to the Anganwadi center and with this grain, a ‘Balbhoj’ is organized on Saturdays. Besides this increase in the attendance of children in Anganwadi centers, malnutrition has also shown a dip. A unique campaign is also going on in Jharkhand to increase awareness about malnutrition. A snake-ladder game has been prepared in Giridih, Jharkhand. Through play, children learn about good and bad habits.
Friends, I am telling you about so many innovative experiments related to malnutrition, because all of us also have to join this campaign in the coming month. The month of September is dedicated to festivals as well as a big campaign related to nutrition. We celebrate the Poshan Maah every year from the 1st to the 30th of September. Many creative and diverse efforts are being made all over the country against malnutrition. Better use of technology and also public participation has become an important part of the Nutrition campaign. From providing mobile devices to millions of Anganwadi workers in the country, a Poshan Tracker has also been launched to monitor the accessibility of Anganwadi services. In all the Aspirational Districts and the states of the North East, 14 to 18 year old daughters have also been brought under the purview of the POSHAN Abhiyaan. The solution to the malady of malnutrition is not limited just to these steps – in this fight, many other initiatives also play an important role. For example, take the Jal Jeevan Mission…this mission is also going to have a huge impact in making India malnutrition free. Efforts for social awareness play an important role in tackling the challenges of malnutrition. I would urge all of you in the coming nutrition month, to take part in the efforts to eradicate malnutrition.
My dear countrymen, Sridevi Varadarajan ji from Chennai has sent me a reminder. She has written something like this on MyGov – There are less than 5 months left for the New Year to come, and we all know that the ensuing New Year will be celebrated as the International Year of Millets. She has also sent me a millet map of the country. She’s also asked if you could discuss this in the upcoming episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. It gives me immense happiness to see this kind of spirit in my countrymen. You will remember that the United Nations has passed a resolution declaring the year 2023 as the International Year of Millets. You will also be very happy to know that this proposal of India had been accepted by more than 70 countries.
Today, around the world, craze for these very coarse grains, millets, is rising. Friends, when I talk about coarse grains, I want to share one of my efforts with you today. For the last some time, when any foreign guests come to India, when Heads of State comes to India, it is my endeavor to get dishes made from the millets of India, that is, our coarse grains in the banquets. And the experience has been that these dignitaries have very much relished them and they also try to collect a lot of information about our coarse grains, about Millets. Millets, coarse grains, have been a part of our Agriculture, Culture and Civilization since ancient times. Millets are mentioned in our Vedas, and similarly, they are also mentioned in Purananuru and Tolkappiyam. If you go to any part of the country, you will definitely find different types of Millets in the food of the people there. In millets too, just like our culture, a lot of diversity is found. Jowar, Bajra, Ragi, Sawan, Kangni, Cheena, Kodo, Kutki, Kuttu, all these are just Millets. India is the largest producer of Millets in the world; hence the responsibility of making this initiative a success also rests on the shoulders of us Indians. Together we all have to make it a mass movement, and also increase the awareness of Millets among the people of the country. And friends, you know very well, millets are also beneficial for the farmers and especially the small farmers. In fact, the crop gets ready in a very short time, and does not require much water either.
For our small farmers, millets are especially beneficial. Millet hay is also considered the best fodder. Nowadays, the young generation is much focused on Healthy Living and Eating. Even if you look at it this way, millets contain plenty of protein, fiber, and minerals. Many people even call it a Superfood. Millets have many benefits, not just one. Along with reducing obesity, they also reduce the risk of diabetes, hypertension and heart related diseases. Along with that, they are also helpful in preventing stomach and liver ailments. We referred to malnutrition, just a while ago. Millets are also very beneficial in fighting malnutrition, since they are packed with energy as well as protein. Today a lot is being done to promote Millets in the country. Along with focusing on research and innovation related to this, FPOs are being encouraged, so that, production can be increased. It is my request to my farmer brothers and sisters to adopt Millets, that is, coarse grains, more and more and benefit from it. It feels good to see that many such start-ups are emerging today, which are working on Millets. Some of these are making Millet Cookies, while some are also making Millet Pancakes and Dosa. There are some who are making Millet Energy Bars, and Millet Breakfasts. I wish all the very best to all the people working in this field. In this festive season, we also use Millets in most of the dishes. You must share the pictures of such delicacies made in your homes on social media, so that it helps in increasing awareness among people about Millets.
My dear countrymen, just a few days ago, I saw news from Jorsing village in Siang district of Arunachal Pradesh. This news was about a change that the people of this village had been waiting for, for many years. In fact, in Jorsing village this month, 4G internet services have started from Independence Day. Like, earlier people used to be happy when electricity reached the village; now, in new India, the same happiness is felt when 4G reaches there. There has been a new sunrise in the form of 4G in the remote areas of Arunachal and North East; internet connectivity has brought a new dawn. Facilities which were once available only in big cities, have been brought to every village through Digital India. For this reason, new digital entrepreneurs are rising in the country. Setha Singh Rawat ji of Ajmer district of Rajasthan runs ‘Darzi Online’, an’E-store’. You will wonder what is Darzi online! Actually, Setha Singh Rawat used to do tailoring work before Covid. When Covid came, Rawat ji did not take this challenge as a difficulty; rather as an opportunity. He joined the ‘common service centre’ i.e. CSC E-Store, and started working online. He saw that customers were placing orders for masks in large numbers. He hired some women and started getting masks made. After this he started his online store named ‘Darzi Online’ in which he started selling stitched clothes of many other kinds. Today, with the power of Digital India, the work of Setha Singh ji has increased so much, that now he gets orders from all over the country. He has given employment to hundreds of women here. Digital India has also turned Om Prakash Singh ji of Unnao, UP into a digital entrepreneur. He has established more than one thousand broadband connections in his village. Om Prakash ji has also built a free wifi zone around his common service centre, which is helping the needy people a lot. Om Prakash ji’s work has increased so much that he has hired more than 20 people. These people are providing broadband connection to the schools, hospitals, tehsil offices and Anganwadi centers of the villages and are also getting employment from it. Like the common service center, there are many such success stories are being seen on the Government E-market place i.e. GEM portal.
Friends, I get many such messages from villages, which share with me the changes brought about by the internet. The internet has changed the way our young friends study and learn. For example, when Gudiya Singh of UP came to her in-laws’ house in Amoiya village of Unnao, she was worried about her studies. But, BharatNet resolved her concern. Gudiya carried on her studies through the internet, and also completed her graduation. How many such lives in villages are getting new strength from the Digital India campaign. Do write to me as much as you can about the Digital Entrepreneurs of the villages, and also share their success stories on social media.
My dear countrymen, sometime back, I received a letter from Ramesh ji, a listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ from Himachal Pradesh. Ramesh ji has enumerated many specialities of the hills in his letter. He wrote that the settlements on the mountains might be far apart, but the hearts of the people are very close to each other. Indeed, we can learn a lot from the lives of the people living in the hills. The first lesson we get from the lifestyle and culture of the hills is that if we do not come under the pressure of circumstances, we can easily overcome them, and secondly, how we can become self-sufficient with local resources. The first lesson that I mentioned, a beautiful picture of it is being seen in the Spiti region these days. Spiti is a tribal area. Here, these days, pea plucking goes on. This is a laborious and difficult task on hill farms. But here, the women of the village gather, and together, pluck peas from each other’s fields. Along with this task, women also sing the local song ‘Chhapra Majhi Chhapra’. That is, mutual cooperation here is also a part of folk tradition. The best example of utilization of local resources is also found in Spiti. Farmers who rear cows in Spiti, dry up the dung and fill it in sacks. When winter comes, these sacks are laid out in the sheds where the cows live, which is called khud here. During snowfall, these sacks give protection to the cows from the cold. After winters, this cow dung is used as manure in the fields. That is, the animals’ protection using animal waste, and also manure for the fields. The cost of cultivation is also low, and the yield in the fields is also high. That is why this area, these days, is also becoming an inspiration for natural farming.
Friends, many such commendable efforts are also being seen in our, other hill state, Uttarakhand. Many types of medicines and plants are found in Uttarakhand, which are very beneficial for our health. One of them is the fruit – Bedu. It is also known as Himalayan Fig. In this fruit, minerals and vitamins are found in abundance. People consume it not only in the form of fruit, but it is also used in the treatment of many diseases. In view of these qualities of this fruit, now the juice of Bedu, jams, chutneys, pickles and dry fruits prepared by drying them have been launched in the market. With the initiative of the Pithoragarh administration and the cooperation of the local people, it has been successful in bringing Bedu to the market in different forms. Bedu has also been launched in the online market by branding it as Pahari Fig. Due to this, farmers have not only found a new source of income, but the benefits of the medicinal properties of Bedu have started reaching far and wide as well.
My dear countrymen, in the beginning of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, today, we referred to the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav. Along with the great festival of Independence Day, many more festivals are lined up in the coming days. Just a few days from now, is the festival of Ganesh Chaturthi, the festival of worship of Bhagwan Ganesha. Ganesh Chaturthi, that is, the festival of blessings of Ganpati Bappa. The festival of Onam is also commencing before Ganesh Chaturthi. Onam, especially in Kerala, will be celebrated with a sense of peace and prosperity. Hartalika Teej too is on the 30th of August. The festival of Nuakhai will also be celebrated in Odisha on the 1st of September. Nuakhai simply means new food, that is, this too, like many other festivals, is a festival associated with our agricultural traditions. Meanwhile, there will also be the Samvatsari festival of the Jain community. All these festivals of ours are synonymous with our cultural prosperity and vitality. I wish you all the best for these festivals and special occasions. Along with these festivals, tomorrow on the 29th of August, National Sports Day will also be celebrated on the birth anniversary of Major Dhyanchand ji. May our young sportspersons continue to raise the glory of our tricolor on global forums, this will be our tribute to Dhyan Chand ji. Let us all keep working together for the country like this; keep raising the honor of the country…With this wish I conclude my point. Next month, we will have ‘Mann Ki Baat’ once again.
Thank you very much!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar!
The topic that grabbed our attention in the last few days is the Cheetah. There have been a lot of messages to talk about cheetahs. Be it Arun Kumar Gupta of Uttar Pradesh or N. Ramachandran Raghuram ji of Telangana, be it Rajan ji of Gujarat or Subrata ji of Delhi, people from all corners of the country have expressed happiness over the return of cheetahs to India. 130 crore Indians are happy, full of pride; this is India’s love for nature. A common question posed by people about this is “Modi ji, when will we get an opportunity to see the cheetahs?”
Friends,
a task force have been formed. This task force will monitor the cheetahs and see how much they have been able to adapt to the environment here. On this basis a decision will be taken after a few months and then you will be able to see the cheetahs. But till then I am assigning some work to all of you. For this, a competition will be organized on the MyGov platform, in which I urge people to share certain things. What should be the name of the campaign that we are running on cheetahs? Can we even think of naming all these cheetahs…. by what name should each of them be called? By the way, if this naming is of traditional nature, then it will be very nice since, anything related to our society and culture, tradition and heritage, draws us easily. Not only that, you should also share how humans should behave with animals! Even in our fundamental duties, emphasis has been laid on Respect for Animals. I appeal to all of you to participate in this competition. Who knows…you may be the first to get anopportunity to see a cheetah as a reward!
My dear countrymen,
today the 25th of September is celebrated as the birthday of Deendayal Upadhyay ji, the brilliant humanist, thinker and great son of the country. The more the youth of any country take pride in their identity and honour, the more their original ideas and philosophies attract them. The biggest feature of Deendayal ji’s thoughts is that in his lifetime, he had seen the great upheavals of the world. He had become a witness to the struggles of ideologies. That is why, he put forward an idea of ​​’Ekatma Manavdarshan’ and ‘Antyodaya’ before the country which was completely Indian. Deendayal ji’s ‘Ekatma Manavdarshan’ is such an idea, which in the realm of ideology gives freedom from conflict and prejudice. He again put forth to the world, the Indian philosophy which considers human beings equal. It has been said in our scriptures – ‘Atmavat Sarvabhuteshu’, that is, we should treat living beings akin to us and similarlytreatthem such. Deendayal ji taught us how Indian philosophy can guide the world even in the modern, social and political perspective. In a way, he awakened our intellectual consciousness by freeing us from the inferiority complex that prevailed in the country after independence. He also used to say – ‘Our freedom can be meaningful only when it expresses our culture and identity’. On the basis of this idea, he had created a vision for the development of the country. Deendayal Upadhyay ji used to say that the measure of the progress of the country is the person at the loweststep. In the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, the more we know Deendayal ji, the more we learn from him, the more we will get inspiration to take the country forward.
My dear countrymen,
three days later, that is, on the 28th of September, is a special day of Amrit Mahotsav. On this day we will celebrate the birth anniversary of Bhagat Singh ji, the brave son of Mother India. Just before the birth anniversary of Bhagat Singh, an important decision has been taken as a tribute to him. It has been decided that the Chandigarh airport will now be named after Shaheed Bhagat Singh. It had been in the waiting for a long time. I congratulate the people of Chandigarh, Punjab, and Haryana and of the entire country for this decision.
Friends,
let us take inspiration from our freedom fighters, following their ideals and build the India of their dreams… this is our tribute to them. The memorials of martyrs, the names of places and institutions named after them inspire us with a sense of duty. Just a few days ago, the country has made a similar effort by setting up the statue of Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose on Kartavya Path and now the name of Chandigarh Airport after Shaheed Bhagat Singh is another step in that direction. I wish, the way in which we are celebrating special occasions related to freedom fighters during the Amrit Mahotsav, in the same way every youth must try something new on the 28th of September.
By the way, my dear countrymen, all of you have another reason to celebrate the 28th of September. Do you know what it is? I will say only two words and I know your enthusiasm will increase fourfold.
These two words are – Surgical Strike!
Hasn’t the Josh risen!! Let us celebrate the campaign of the ongoing Amrit Mahotsav in our country with full enthusiasm, sharing our happiness with everyone.
My dear countrymen,
it is said – no obstacle can stand in the way of a person who has been forged by the struggles of life. In our everyday life, we also see some friends who are coping with some physical challenge or the other. There are many people who are either unable to hear, or are unable to express themselves through speech. The biggest support for such friends is Sign Language. But a big problem in India for years was that there were no clear gestures, no standards for Sign Language. To overcome these difficulties, the Indian Sign Language Research and Training Center was established in the year 2015. I am happy that this institution has thus far prepared a dictionary comprising ten thousand words and expressions. Two days ago i.e. on the 23rd of September, on the Sign Language Day, many school courses have also been launched in Sign Language. A lot of emphasis has also been given in the National Education Policy to maintain a fixed standard for Sign Language. It is being further disseminated, even by making videos of the dictionary of Sign Language. On YouTube, many people, many institutions, have started their channels in Indian Sign Language, that is, the campaign that started in the country about Sign Language 7-8 years ago, is benefitting millions of my specially-abled brothers and sisters now. Pooja ji, who hails from Haryana, is very happy with the Indian Sign Language. Earlier she was not able to communicate with her son, but after going through Sign Language training in 2018, the lives of both mother and son have become easier. Pooja ji’s son also learned Sign Language and in his school he won a prize in storytelling as well. Similarly, Tinkaji has a six-year-old daughter who cannot hear. Tinkaji had made her daughter undergo a Sign Language course but she herself did not know Sign Language, and hence she could not communicate with her daughter. Now Tinkaji has also undergone sign language training and thus both mother and daughter now converse a lot among themselves. Manju ji of Kerala has also benefited a lot from these efforts. Manju jiis not able to hear since birth. Not only that, this has been the situation in the lives of her parents as well. In such a situation, sign language has become a means of communication for the whole family. Now Manju ji herself has decided to become a Sign Language teacher.
Friends,
I am also discussing about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ so that the awareness about Indian Sign Language increases. With this, we will be able to help our specially-abled friends more and more. Brothers and sisters, a few days ago, I got a copy of the Hemkosh too written in Braille. Hemkosh is one of the oldest dictionaries of Assamese language. It was prepared in the 19th century. It was edited by eminent linguist Hemchandra Barua ji. The Braille Edition of Hemkosh is around 10,000 pages long and is going to be published in more than 15 volumes. In this, more than 1 lakh words have to be translated. I greatly appreciate this sensitive effort. Every such effort goes a long way in increasing the skill and capability of our specially-abled friends. Today India is also raising the flag of success in Para Sports. We have all been witness to this in many tournaments. Today there are many people who are engaged in promoting the fitness culture among the specially-abled at the grassroots level. This imparts a lot of strength to the self-confidence of the specially-abled.
My dear countrymen,
a few days ago, I just met a girl from Surat, Anvi. My meeting with Anvi and Anvi’s yoga has been so memorable that I want to tell all the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about it. Friends, Anvi is afflicted with Down’s Syndrome since birth and she has also been battling with serious heart disease since childhood. She also had to undergo open heart surgery when she was only three months old. Despite all these difficulties, neither Anvi, nor her parents ever gave up. Anvi’s parents gathered all the information about Down’s syndrome and then decided on the way to reduce Anvi’s dependence on others. They started teaching Anvi how to lift a glass of water, how to tie shoe laces, how to button clothes; small things such as those. What the appropriate place of things is, what the good habits are, they tried to teach Anvi all this with a lot of patience. The way daughter Anvi showed her will to learn, displayed her talent, her parents also got a lot of encouragement. They inspired Anvi to learn yoga. The problem was so serious, that Anvi could not even stand on her own two feet…In such a situation, her parents inspired Anvi to learn yoga. When she went to the Yoga coach for the first time, the coach too was in a dilemma whether this innocent girl would be able to do yoga! But even the coach probably had no idea of ​​what stuff Anvi was made of. She started practicing yoga with her mother and now she has become an expert in yoga. Today Anvi participates in competitions across the country and wins medals. Yoga gave a new life to Anvi. Anvi assimilated yoga and imbibed life. Anvi’s parents told me that yoga has brought amazing changes in Anvi’s life… Now her self-confidence has become remarkable. Yoga has also improved Anvi’s physical health and the need for medicines is also lessening. I would like that the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in the country and abroad do a scientific study of the benefits of yoga to Anvi. I think Anvi is a good case study, for those who want to test the power of yoga. Such scientists should come forward with studies based on Anvi’s success and introduce the world to the power of yoga. Any such research could be of great help to children afflicted with Down’s syndrome around the world. Now, the world has accepted that yoga is very effective for physical and mental wellness. Especially in problems related to diabetes and blood pressure, yoga helps a lot. In view of such power of yoga, the United Nations had decided to celebrate the International Yoga Day on the 21st of June. Now, United Nations has recognized and honored another effort of India. This is an effort, started in the year 2017 – the “India Hypertension Control Initiative”. Under this, lakhs of people suffering from blood pressure problems are being treated in government wellness centers. The way this initiative has attracted the attention of international organizations is unprecedented. It is a matter of encouragement for all of us that out of those who have been treated, about half of them are having their blood pressure under control. I congratulate all the people working for this initiative, who made it a success with their untiring hard work.
Friends,
the evolutionary journey of human life has been continuously connected with water – be it seas, rivers or ponds. India is also fortunate that due to the long coastline of more than seven and a half thousand kilometers (7500 km), our bond with the sea has remained unbroken. This coastal border passes through many states and islands. India’s culture, full of different communities and diversity can be seen flourishing here. Not only that, the cuisine of these coastal areas attracts a lot of people. But along with these interesting things, there is also a sad side. These coastal areas of ours are facing many environmental challenges. Climate Change remains a major threat to Marine Eco-Systems.On the other hand, the litter spread on our beaches is disturbing. It becomes our responsibility to make serious and continuous efforts for these challenges. Here I would like to talk about an effort of Coastal Cleaning in the coastal areas of the country ‘Swachh Sagar – Surakshit Sagar’. This campaign, which started on the 5th of July culminated on the 17thof September, the day of Vishwakarma Jayanti. This day was also Coastal Clean Up Day. This campaign which started in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav lasted for 75 days. Public participation in this was a sight to behold. During this effort, many cleanliness related programs were seen for the entire two and a half months. A long human chain was made in Goa. During the Ganpati immersion in Kakinada, people were told about the harm caused by plastic. About 5000 young friends from the NSS collected more than 30 tonnes of plastic. Within three days in Odisha, more than 20 thousand school students took a pledge that they would inspire their family and people along with them as well, for the Swachh Sagar – Surakshit Sagar initiative. I would like to congratulate all the people who took part in this campaign.
When I interact with Elected Officials, especially the mayors of cities and sarpanches of villages, I urge them to include Local Communities and Local Organizations in efforts like cleanliness as well as adopt innovative methods.
There is a team in Bangalore – Youth for Parivartan. For the last eight years, this team has been working on cleanliness and other community activities. Their motto is very clear – ‘Stop Complaining, Start Acting’. This team has so far beautified more than 370 places across the city. The campaign of Youth for Parivartan has connected 100 to 150 (150) citizens at every place. Every Sunday this program starts in the morning and continues till noon. In this task, not only is the garbage lifted, the work of painting the walls and making artistic sketches is also done. At many places, you can also see sketches of famous people and inspirational quotes by them. Following upon the efforts of Youth For Parivartan of Bangalore, I would also like to tell you about the ‘Kabaad se Jugaad’ campaign of Meerut. This campaign is related to the protection of the environment as well as the beautification of the city. The special thing about this campaign is that, in this, waste such as iron scrap, plastic waste, old tires and drums are used. This campaign is also an example of how to beautify public places at a low cost. I appreciate all the people involved in this campaign from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen,
at this time there is a festive spirit all around the country. Tomorrow is the first day of Navaratri. In this, we will worship the first avatar of Goddess ‘Maa Shailputri’. From here, there will be nine days of self discipline, restraint and fasting, then there will also be the festival of Vijayadashami. That is, if we look at it in a way, we will find that along with faith and spirituality, how a profound message is hidden in our festivals. The attainment of ‘Siddhi’ through discipline and restraint, and then the festival of victory, that’s the way to achieve any goal in life. After Dussehra, the festival of Dhanteras and Diwaliwill follow.
Friends,
during the past years, a new resolution of the country has also been associated with our festivals. You all know, this is the resolution of ‘Vocal for Local’. We now include our local artisans, craftsmen and traders in the joy of festivals. On the occasion of Bapu’s birth anniversary on the 2nd of October, we have to take a pledge to intensify this campaign. Khadi, handloom, handicrafts…along with all these products, you must buy local goods. After all, the true joy of this festival is also when everyone becomes a part of it. Therefore, people associated with the work of local products also have to be supported by us. A good way is to include these type of products in whatever gifts we give during the festival.
At this time, this campaign is also special because during the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, we are also onwards with the goal of a self-reliant India. Which, in the real sense, will be a true tribute to the freedom fighters. That’s why I request you to break all the records this time to buy these products of Khadi, handloom or handicrafts. We have seen that polythene bags are also being used a lot for packing and packaging during festivals. The harmful litter of polythene on the festivals observing cleanliness is also against the spirit of our festivals. Therefore, we should use only locally made non-plastic bags. The trend of jute, cotton, banana fibre, many such traditional bags is on the rise once again. It is our duty to promote them on the occasion of festivals, and take care of our health and environment along with cleanliness.
My dear countrymen,
it is said in our scriptures –
‘Parhit Saris Dharam Nahi Bhai’
That is, there is no other Dharma like doing good to others, serving others, doing charity. Recently, in the country, another glimpse of this spirit of social service was seen. You must have also seen that people are coming forward and are adopting one TB patient or the other, taking the lead in ensuring a nutritious diet. Actually, it is a part of the TB Free India campaign, whose basis is public participation; a sense of duty. It is possible to cure TB with the right nutrition, with the right medicines at the right time. I believe that with this power of public participation, India will definitely be free from TB by the year 2025.
Friends,
I have also come to know such an example from the Union Territories of Dadra-Nagar Haveli and Daman-Diu, which touches the heart. Jinu Rawatiya ji, who lives in a tribal area here, has written that under the ongoing village adoption program, students of the medical college have adopted 50 villages. It also includes the village of Jinu Ji. These medical students make the people of the village aware to avoid illness, also help in the recuperation, and also impart information about the schemes of the government. This spirit of philanthropy has brought new joy in the lives of the people living in the villages. I congratulate all the students of the medical college for this endeavor.
Friends,
a variety of  new topics are being discussed in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Many times, through this program, we get an opportunity to delve into the depth of some old subjects. Last month in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I discussed about coarse cereals, and celebrating the year 2023 as ‘International Millet Year’. People are very curious about this topic. I have received many such letters in which people have written how they have made millets a part of their daily diet. Some people have also referred to traditional dishes made from millets. These are signs of a big change. Seeing this enthusiasm of people, I think that we should prepare an e-book together, in which people can share their experiences and dishes made from millets, so that, before the start of the International Millet Year, we will have a publicencyclopediabased on millets which can be published on the MyGov portal.
Friends,
that’s all this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, but before I leave, I want to tell you about the National Games as well. National Games are being organized in Gujarat from the 29th of September. This is a very special occasion, because the National Games are being organized after many years. The previous events had to be canceled due to the Covid pandemic. My very best wishes to every player who takes part in this sports meet. To raise the enthusiasm of the players on this day, I will be in their midst. All of you must also follow the National Games and encourage our players. I now take leave of you. We will meet again next month with new topics in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Dhanyavaad, Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today, ‘Chhath’, the great festival of sun worship is being celebrated in many parts of the country. Lakhs of devotees have reached their villages, their homes, their families to be a part of the ‘Chhath’ festival. I pray that Chhath Maiya bless everyone with prosperity and well being.
Friends, the tradition of worshiping the Sun is a proof of how deep our culture, our faith, is related to nature. Through this puja the importance of sunlight in our life has been illustrated. Along with this, the message has also been conveyed that ups and downs are an integral part of life. Therefore, we should maintain a uniform poise have in every situation. Various fruits and Thekua are offered in the worship of Chhath Maiya. The fasting in this is also not less than any difficult sadhna. Another special thing about Chhath Puja is that the items used for worship are prepared by myriad people of the society together. In this, a basket or supli made of bamboo is used. Earthen lamps have their own significance. Through this, the importance of farmers who grow gram and small entrepreneurs making batashas has been established in the society. Without their cooperation, the worship of Chhath, simply cannot be completed. The festival of Chhath also emphasizes on the importance of cleanliness in our lives. On the arrival of this festival, roads, rivers, ghats, various sources of water, all are cleaned at the community level. The festival of Chhath is also an example of ‘Ek Bharat- Shrestha Bharat’. Today, wherever the people of Bihar and Purvanchal are in any corner of the country, Chhath is being celebrated with great pomp. Chhath is now getting organized on a large scale in different districts of Maharashtra along with Delhi, Mumbai and many parts of Gujarat. I do remember that earlier in Gujarat, Chhath Pooja was not performed to this extent.But with the passage of time, the colors of Chhath Puja have started getting dissolved in almost the whole of Gujarat. I am also very happy to see this. Nowadays we see, how many grand pictures of Chhath Puja come from abroad too. That is, the rich heritage of India, our faith, is re-inforcing its identity in every corner of the world. My best wishes to every devotee who is participating in this great festival.
My dear countrymen, we have just talked about the holy Chhath Puja, the worship of Lord Surya. So today, along with worshiping the Sun, why not also discuss his boon! This blessing of Sun God is – ‘Solar Energy’. Solar Energy is a subject today, in which the whole world is looking at its future and for India, the Sun God has not only been worshiped for centuries, but has also been the focus of our way of life. Today, India is combining its traditional experiences with modern science, that is why, today, we have become one of the largest countries to generate electricity from solar energy. How solar energy is changing the lives of the poor and middle class of our country is also a subject of study.
In Tamil Nadu, there is a farmer in Kancheepuram, Thiru K. Ezilon. He took the benefit of ‘PM Kusum Yojana’ and got a solar pumpset of ten horsepower installed in his farm. Now they do not have to spend anything on electricity for their farm. They are not even dependent on the government’s electricity supply for irrigation in the field any more. Similarly, in Bharatpur, Rajasthan, another beneficiary farmer of ‘KusumYojana’ is – Kamalji Meena. Kamal ji installed a solar pump in the field, due to which his expenses have come down. Since the expense has come down, the income also has increased. Kamalji is also connecting many other small industries with solar electricity. There is timber work in their area, there are products made from cow dung and solar electricity is also being used in them.
They are also giving employment to 10-12 people, that is, the fragrance of Kamalji’s initiative that started with Kusum Yojana, has started reaching many people.
Friends, can you ever imagine that on using electricity for a month, instead of getting your electricity bill, you get paid for electricity ? Solar energy has also demonstrated that. A few days ago, you must have heard a lot about the country’s first Solar Village – Modhera of Gujarat! Most of the houses in Modhera Surya Gram have started generating electricity from solar power. Now in many houses there, there is no electricity bill at the end of the month; instead, a check from the electricity income is being generated. Seeing this happen, now people of many villages of the country are writing letters to me stating that their village should also be converted into Surya Gram, that is, the day is not far when the construction of Suryagrams in India will become a big mass movement and the people of Modhera village have already begun that.
Let us also introduce the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to the people of Modhera. Shriman Vipinbhai Patel is at the moment with us on the phone line.
Prime Minister :- Look, now Modhera is being discussed as a model for the whole country. But when all your relatives and acquaintances ask you, what do you tell them, what have the benefits been?
Vipinji :- Sir, when people ask us, we say that whatever bill we used to get, that is now zero and sometimes it comes to 70 rupees, but the economic condition in our entire village is improving.
Prime Minister :- That is, in a way, the earlier concern of electricity bill is over!
Vipinji :- Yes sir, that is correct sir. Now there is no tension in the whole village. Everyone is feeling that what Sir has done, he has done very well. Everyone is happy Sir. All are delighted.
Prime Minister: – Now they themselves have become the owners of the electricity factory in their own houses. Electricity is being generated on the roof of their own houses.
Vipinji :- Yes sir, it is right sir.
Prime Minister :- So what is the effect of this change on the people of the village?
Vipinji:- Sir, the people of the whole village, they are into agriculture, so we have got rid of electricity hassles. No electricity bill is not to be paid, they have become free of worries.
Prime Minister :- Meaning, the electricity bill has also gone and the convenience has increased.
Vipinji :- The hassles are over Sir and Sir, when you had come here and that 3D show which you inaugurated here, after that the glory of Modhera village has grown manifold. And the secretary who had come sir…
Prime Minister :- Yes sir…
Vipinji :- So the village became famous sir.
Prime Minister :- Yes, it was the wish of the Secretary General of the UN himself. He urged me a lot that you have done such a great work, so I want to go there and see.
Prime Minister :- Fine, Vipin Bhai, I wish you and all the people of your village many best wishes and the world should take inspiration from you and this solar energy campaign should reach every home.
Vipinji :- Alright sir. We will tell all of them Sir, to get solar installed, even with your own money,… even then, there is a lot of benefit.
Prime Minister :- Yes, make the people understand. Wish you the very best. Thanks brother!
Vipinji :- Thank you sir, Thank you sir, my life feels blessed, talking to you.
Prime Minister :- Many thanks to Vipinbhai.
Let us now also talk to Varsha Behen in Modhera village.
Varshaben :- Hello! Namaste sir!
Prime Minister :- Namaste-Namaste Varshaben | how are you
Varshaben :- We are very good sir. How are you ?
Prime Minister :- I am very fine.
Varshaben :- We are blessed to talk to you sir.
Prime Minister :- Okay Varshaben !
Varshaben :- Yes.
Prime Minister:- You are in Modhera…, you are from a military family.
Varshaben :- I am from military family. This is an ex Army man’s wife speaking sir.
Prime Minister :- So where all did you get a chance to go in India earlier?
Varshaben :- I got a chance to stay together in Rajasthan, in Gandhi Nagar, Kachra Kanjhor in Jammu. There were a lot of facilities available there sir.
Prime Minister :- Yes. Being part of the army, you are also speaking Hindi well.
Varshaben :- Yes-yes. I have learned.
Prime Minister :- Tell me, the big transformation that came in Modhera, you got this Solar Rooftop Plant installed. What people might be saying in the beginning, then it must have come to your mind, what that meant? What are you doing ?what will happen ? How can electricity come this way? These are all things that must have come to your mind. What is your experience now? What is the benefit of this?
Varshaben:- A lot sir. One benefit after the other sir. Sir, Diwali is celebrated every day in our village because of you. We are getting electricity for 24 hours a day…, there is no bill at all! In our house we have brought all electric appliances in the house sir, we are using everything – because of you sir. Since, there is no bill, we can use everything with free mind.
Prime Minister :- This is true, you have also made up your mind to make maximum use of electricity.
Varshaben :- Indeed Sir! Right now we do not have any problem, we can run all this… washing machine, AC, everything with a free mind, sir!
Prime Minister :- And the rest of the people of the village are also happy because of this?
Varshaben :- Very very happy sir.
Prime Minister:- Well, does your husband work at the Sun Temple there? So the light show that happened there was such a big event and now guests from all over the world are coming.
VarshaBen :- Foreigners from all over the world can come but you have made our village famous in the world.
Prime Minister :- So your husband’s work must have increased now that so many guests are coming there to see the temple.
VarshaBen :- Oh! It doesn’t matter, no matter how much work increases sir, my husband has no problem with that…do go on developing our village.
Prime Minister :- Now we all have to do the development of the village together.
VarshaBen :- Yes, yes. Sir we are with you
Prime Minister :- And I would like to congratulate the people of Modhera because the village accepted this scheme and they were convinced that yes we can make electricity in our house.
Rain Ben -: 24 Hours Sir! We have electricity in our house and we are very happy.
Prime Minister :- Fine! I wish you the very best. The money that is saved, use it for the betterment of the children. Use that money well so that your life benefits. I wish you the very best. And my salutations to all the people of Modhera!
Friends, what Varshaben and Vipin Bhai have mentioned is an inspiration for the whole country, for villages and cities. Modhera’s experience can be replicated across the country. The power of the sun will now save money and increase income. Manzoor Ahmed Larhwal is a friend from Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir. On account of winters in Kashmir, the cost of electricity is high. For this reason, Manzoorji’s electricity bill also used to be more than Rs. 4 thousand, but, since Manzoorji has got a Solar Rooftop Plant installed at his house, his expenditure has come down to less than half. Similarly, KunniDeori, a daughter from Odisha, is making solar energy a medium of employment for her as well as for other women. Kunni lives in Kardapal village of Kendujhar district of Odisha. She trains tribal women to spin silk on a solar-powered reeling machine. Due to the Solar Machine, these tribal women do not have to bear the burden of electricity bill, and they are earning income. This is the very boon of Sun God’s solar energy. The more the boon and the blessings spread, the better it is. Therefore, I urge you to join this and add others too.
My dear countrymen, just now I was talking to you about the sun. Now my attention is going towards space. That is because our country is doing wonders in the solar sector as well as the space sector. The whole world, today, is surprised to see the achievements of India. So I thought, by telling this to the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I should make them happy too.
Friends, you must have seen a few days ago, that India has placed 36 satellites in space simultaneously. This success achieved just a day before Diwali, in a way, it is a special Diwali gift from our youth to the country. With this launching, from Kashmir to Kanyakumari and from Kutch to Kohima, in the whole country, digital connectivity will be further strengthened. With the help of this, even the remotest areas will be more easily connected with the rest of the country. When the country is self-reliant, how, it reaches new heights of success – this is also an example of this. While talking to you, I also remember those old days, when India was denied the Cryogenic Rocket Technology. But the scientists of India not only developed indigenous technology, but today with the help of it, dozens of satellites are being sent to space simultaneously. With this launching, India has emerged as a strong player in the global commercial market…with this, new doors of oppurtunities have also opened up for India.
Friends, our country, which is moving with the resolve of a developed India, can achieve its goals only with the efforts of everyone. Earlier in India, the space sector was confined within the purview of government systems. Since, the space sector was opened for India’s youth and revolutionary changes have started coming in it. Indian industries and start-ups are engaged in bringing new innovations and new technologies in this field. In particular, the collaboration of IN-SPACe is going to make a big difference in this area.
Non-government companies are also getting the facility to launch their payloads and satellites through IN-SPACe. I would urge more and more Start-ups and Innovators to take full advantage of these huge opportunities being created in India in the space sector.
My dear countrymen, when it comes to students, youth power, leadership power, so many outdated stereotypes have become ingrained in our mind. Many times we see that when student power is referred to, its scope is limited by linking it with the student union elections. But the scope of student power is very big, very vast. Student power is the basis of making India powerful. After all, it’s the youth of today, who will take are today will take India till 2047. When India celebrates her centenary, this power of youth, their hard work, their sweat, their talent, will take India to the heights that the country is resolving today. The way our youth of today are working for the country, and have joined nation building, makes me filled with confidence. The way our youth solve problems in hackathons, stay awake all night and work for hours, is very inspiring. A hackathon held in recent years, with lakhs of youth of the country, together have solved many challenges; have given new solutions to the country.
Friends, you may remember, I had called for ‘Jai Anusandhan’ from the Red Fort. I had also talked about making this decade the Techade of India. I loved seeing this; our IIT’s students have also taken over its command. This month on 14-15 October, all 23 IITs came on one platform for the first time to showcase their innovations and research projects. In this fair, students and researchers who came from all over the country, displayed more than 75 best projects. Healthcare, Agriculture, Robotics, Semiconductors, 5G Communications, these projects were made on many such themes. Although all these projects were one better than the other, I want to draw your attention to some projects. For example, a team from IIT Bhubaneswar has developed a portable ventilator for new born babies. It runs on battery and can be used easily in remote areas. This can prove to be very helpful in saving the lives of babies who are born prematurely. Be it electric mobility, drone technology, 5G, many of our students are engaged in developing new technology related to them. Several IITs are also working together on a multilingual project that makes learning local languages easier.
This project will help the new National Education Policy a lot in achieving those goals as well. You will also be happy to know that IIT Madras and IIT Kanpur have played a leading role in preparing India’s indigenous 5G testbed. This is certainly a great start. I hope to see many more such efforts in the times to come. I also hope that taking inspiration from IITs, other institutions will also step up their R&D activities. |
My dear countrymen, sensitivity towards the environment is embedded in every particle of our society and we can feel it all around us. There is no dearth of people in the country who spend a lifetime in the protection of the environment.
We can also learn a lot from Suresh Kumar ji, who lives in Bangaluru, Karnataka, he has a great passion for protecting nature and environment. 20 years ago, he had taken the initiative to rejuvenate a forest of Sahakarnagar in the city. It was a difficult task. But these saplings that were planted 20 years ago have grown into 40 feet tall huge trees. Now their beauty captivates everyone’s mind. This also gives a feeling of great pride to the people living there. Suresh Kumar ji also does another wonderful job. He has also built a bus shelter in Sahakarnagar to promote Kannada language and culture. He has also presented brass plates written in Kannada to hundreds of people. If both Ecology and Culture grow together and flourish…, just imagine how great it would be!
Friends, today more awareness is being seen among people about Eco-friendly living and Eco-friendly products than ever before. I also got a chance to know about one such interesting endeavor from Tamil Nadu. This is a brilliant effort by a team of tribal women in Anaikatti, Coimbatore. These women crafted ten thousand Eco-friendly Terracotta Tea Cups for export. The amazing thing is that these women themselves took up the entire responsibility of making the Terracotta Tea Cups. From Clay Mixing to Final Packaging, they did all the work themselves. They had also taken training for this. Whatever praise is showered on this wonderful effort is little.
Friends, some villages of Tripura have also set very good examples. You must have heard about Bio-Village, but some villages of Tripura have ascended to the level of Bio-Village 2. Bio-Village 2 emphasizes how to minimize the damage caused by natural disasters. In this, full attention is given to improve the quality of life of the people through various measures. There is complete focus on Solar Energy, Biogas, Bee Keeping and Bio Fertilizers. Overall, Bio-Village 2 is going to lend a lot of strength to the campaign against climate change. I am very happy to see the increasing enthusiasm for environmental protection in different parts of the country. A few days ago, in India, Mission Life dedicated to protect the environment has also been launched. The simple principle of Mission Life is – Promote such a lifestyle, which does not harm the environment. I urge you to also know Mission Life and try to adopt it.
Friends, Tomorrow, the 31st of October, is National Unity Day, the auspicious occasion of the birth anniversary of Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. On this day, Run for Unity is organized in every corner of the country. This race strengthens the thread of unity in the country, inspires our youth. A few days ago, the same sentiment has been seen during our National Games as well. With the theme ‘Judega India to Jeetega India’, national game, on the one hand, have given a strong message of unity, on the other, have promoted India’s sports culture. You will be happy to know that the National Games this time was the biggest ever organized in India. 36 sports were included in this, in which, 7 new and two indigenous competitions, Yogasan and Mallakhamb were also included. The three teams that were at the fore in winning the Gold Medal are – Services team, Maharashtra and Haryana team. Six National Records and about 60 National Games Records were also made in these games. I congratulate all the players, who won medals, made new records, participated in this sports competition. I also wish these players a bright future.
Friends, I would also like to express my heartfelt appreciation to all those people who contributed in the successful organization of the National Games held in Gujarat. You have seen that in Gujarat the National Games were held during Navratri. Before organizing these games, once it came to my mind that at this time the whole of Gujarat is involved in these festivals, so how will people be able to enjoy these games? Such elaborate arrangement and on the other hand, arrangements for Navratri Garba etc!. How will Gujarat do all this work at the same time? But the people of Gujarat made all the guests happy with their hospitality. The way art, sports and culture came together during the National Games in Ahmedabad, it filled all with joy. While the players also used to participate in the games during the day; in the evening they used to get immersed in the colors of Garba and Dandiya. They also shared a lot of pictures of Gujarati food and Navratri on social media. It was a pleasure for all of us to see. After all, through games like these, one comes to know about the diverse cultures of India. They equally strengthen the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’.
My dear countrymen, on the 15th of November, our country will celebrate the Janjateeya Gaurav Diwas. You will remember, the country started this last year to celebrate the tribal heritage and pride on the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda. Bahgwan BirsaMunda had united millions of people against the British rule in his short lifetime. He had sacrificed his life to protect India’s independence and tribal culture. There is so much that we can learn from Dharti Aba Birsa Munda. Friends, when it comes to Dharti Aba Birsa Munda, let’s look at his short life span; even today we can learn a lot from him and Dharti Aba had said- ‘This earth is ours, we are its protectors.’ There is also a sense of duty for the motherland in this sentence and there is also a feeling of our duty for the environment. He had always emphasized that we should not forget our tribal culture, we should not go far from it at all. Even today, we can learn a lot about nature and environment from the tribal societies of the country.
Friends, Last year on the occasion of the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda, I had the privilege of inaugurating the Bhagwan Birsa Munda Museum in Ranchi. I would like to urge the youth that whenever they get time, they must visit it. I also want to tell you that on November 1, i.e. the day after tomorrow, I shall be at will be at Mangarh, on the border of Gujarat-Rajasthan. Mangarh has had a very special place in India’s freedom struggle and our rich tribal heritage. There was a terrible massacre here in November 1913, in which the British brutally murdered the local tribals. It is said that more than a thousand tribals lost their lives in this massacre. This tribal movement was led by Govind Guru ji, whose life is an inspiration to everyone. Today I bow to all those tribal martyrs and the indomitable courage and valor of Govind Guru ji. The more faithfully we follow the ideals of Bhagwan Birsa Munda, Govind Guru and other freedom fighters during Amrit Kaal, the more our country will touch newer heights.
My dear countrymen, the 8th of November is Gurupurab. As much as the Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak ji is important for our faith, we equally get to learn from it. Throughout his life, Guru Nanak Dev Ji spread light for the sake of humanity. In the last few years, the country has made many efforts to spread the light of Gurus to the masses. We had the privilege of celebrating the 550th Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak DevJi on a large scale in the country and abroad. It is equally pleasant to see the development of the Kartarpur Sahib Corridor after decades of waiting. A few days ago I also got the privilege of laying the foundation stone of the ropeway for Hemkund Sahib. We have to continuously learn from the teachings of our Gurus and remain devoted to them. This day is also Kartik Purnima. On this day, at places of piligrimages, we bathe and perform service and charity. I extend warm greetings to all of you on these festivals. In the coming days, many states will also celebrate their Statehood day. Andhra Pradesh will celebrate its foundation day; Kerala Piravi will be celebrated. Karnataka Rajyotsava will be celebrated. Similarly, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Haryana will also celebrate their Statehood day. I convey my best wishes to the people of all these states. In all our states, the stronger the spirit to learn from each other, to cooperate, and to work together, the more the country will go forward. I am sure we will move forward with the same spirit. You all take care of yourself, stay healthy. I take leave of you till the next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Namaskar, thanks.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
I extend a warm welcome to you all in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, once again. This programmme is the 95th episode. We are fast moving towards the century of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This programmme is another medium for me to connect with a 130 crore countrymen. Before every episode, reading letters from villages and cities, listening to audio messages from children to elders; it is like a spiritual experience for me.
Friends, I want to start today’s program referring to a unique gift. There is a weaver brother in Rajanna Sircilla district of Telangana – YeldhiHariprasad Garu. He has sent me this G-20 logo woven with his own hands. I was surprised to see this wonderful gift. Hariprasad ji is such an expert in his art that he attracts everyone’s attention. Hariprasad ji has also sent me a letter along with this hand-woven G-20 logo. In this he has written that it is a matter of great pride for India to host the G-20 summit next year. Amid the joy of this achievement of the country, he has prepared this logo of G-20 with his own hands. He has inherited this wonderful talent of weaving from his father and today he is engaged in it with full passion.
Friends, a few days ago I had the privilege of launching the G-20 logo and the website of the Presidency of India. This logo was chosen through a public contest. When I received this gift sent by Hariprasad Garu, another thought came to my mind. I was very happy to see how connected even a person sitting in a district of Telangana could feel with a summit like G-20. Today, many people like Hariprasad Garu have sent letters to me saying that their hearts have swelled with pride at the country hosting such a big summit. I will also mention to you the message of Subba Rao Chillara ji from Pune and Tushar Jagmohan from Kolkata. They have highly appreciated India’s pro-active efforts regarding G-20.
Friends, the G-20 has a partnership comprising two-thirds of the world’s population, three-fourths of world trade, and 85% of world GDP. You can imagine – India is going to preside over such a big group, such a powerful group, 3 days from now i.e. from the 1st of December. What a great opportunity has come for India, for every Indian! This becomes even more special because India was awarded this responsibility during Azadi Ka Amrit Kaal .
Friends, the Presidency of G-20 has arrived as a big opportunity for us. We have to make full use of this opportunity and focus on Global Good, world welfare. Whether it is peace or unity, sensitivity towards the environment, or sustainable development, India has solutions to challenges related to these. The theme that we have given “One Earth, One Family, One Future” shows our commitment to Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam. We always say –
Om Sarvesham Swastirbhavatu.
Sarvesham Shanti Bhavatu.
Sarvesham Purnambhavatu.
Sarvesham Mangalambhavatu.
Om Shanti: Shanti: Shanti: ॥
That is, there should be welfare of all, peace to all, fulfillment to all and well being for all. In the coming days, many programs related to G-20 will be organized in different parts of the country. During this period, people from different parts of the world will get a chance to visit your states. I am sure that you will bring the diverse and distinctive colors of your culture to the world and you also have to remember that the people coming to the G-20, even if they come now as delegates, are tourists of the future. I urge all of you, especially my young friends on one more thing. Like Hariprasad Garu, you too must join the G-20 in one way or the other. The Indian logo of G-20 can be made, can be printed, in a very cool way, in a stylish way, on clothes. I would also urge schools, colleges and universities to create opportunities for discussions, debates and competitions related to G-20 in their respective places. If you go to the G20.in website, you will find many things there according to your interest.
My dear countrymen, on the 18th of November, the whole country witnessed new history being made in the space sector. On this day, India sent its first such rocket into space, which was designed and prepared by the private sector of India. The name of this rocket is – ‘Vikram-S’. As soon as this first rocket of the indigenous Space Start-up made a historic flight from Sriharikota, the heart of every Indian swelled with pride.
Friends, ‘Vikram-S’ Rocket is equipped with many features. It is also lighter than other rockets, and also cheaper. Its development cost is much less than the cost incurred by other countries involved in space missions. In space technology, World class standard at a low cost, has now become the hallmark of India. Another modern technology has been used in making this rocket. You will be surprised to know that some crucial parts of this rocket have been made through 3D Printing. Surely, the name ‘Prarambh’ given to the launch mission of ‘Vikram-S’, suits it perfectly. This marks the dawn of a new era for the private space sector in India. This is the beginning of a new era full of self-confidence for the country. You can imagine the children who once made paper airplanes and used to fly them with their hands are now getting a chance to make airplanes in India itself. You can imagine those children who once used to draw shapes in the sky, looking at the moon and stars, are now getting a chance to make rockets in India itself. After space was opened to the private sector, these dreams of the youth are also coming true. As if these youth making rockets are saying, Sky is not the limit.
Friends, India is sharing its success in the space sector with its neighbouring countries as well. Just yesterday, India launched a satellite, which has been jointly developed by India and Bhutan. This satellite will send pictures of very good resolution which will help Bhutan in the management of its natural resources. The launching of this satellite is a reflection of the strong Indo-Bhutan relations.
Friends, you must have noticed that in the last few episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we discussed a lot on Space, Tech, Innovation. There are two special reasons for this: one is that our youth are doing wonderful work in this field. They are thinking Big and Achieving Big. Now they are not going to be satisfied with small achievements. Secondly, in this exciting journey of innovation and value creation, they are also encouraging their other young colleagues and start-ups.
Friends, when we are talking about innovations related to technology, how can we forget drones? India is also moving fast in the field of drones. A few days ago we saw how apples were transported through drones in Kinnaur, Himachal Pradesh. Kinnaur is a remote district of Himachal and there is heavy snowfall in this season. With this much snowfall, Kinnaur’s connectivity with the rest of the state becomes very difficult for weeks. In such a situation, the transportation of apples from there is equally difficult. Now with the help of Drone Technology, delicious Kinnauri apples of Himachal will start reaching people more quickly. This will reduce the expenditure of our farmer brothers and sisters – apples will reach the market on time, there will be less wastage of apples.
Friends, Today our countrymen are making things possible with their innovations, which could not even be imagined earlier. Who would not be happy to see this? In recent years, our country has undertaken a long journey of achievements. I have full faith that we Indians and especially our young generation are not going to stop now.
Dear countrymen, I am going to play a small clip for you…..
##(Song)##
All of you must have heard this song sometime or the other. After all, this is Bapu’sfavorite song, but if I tell you that the singers who have sung it are from Greece, you will definitely be surprised! And this will also fill you with pride. This song has been sung by the singer from Greece – ‘Konstantinos Kalaitzis’. He had sung it during the 150th birth anniversary celebrations of Gandhiji. But today I am discussing him for some other reason. He has a great passion for India and Indian music. He has so much affection for India, that in the last 42 (forty two) years he has come to India almost every year. He has studied about the origin of Indian music, different Indian musical systems, different types of ragas, talas and rasas as well as different gharanas. He has studied the contribution of many great personalities of Indian music; he has also closely understood the different aspects of classical dances of India. Now he has put together all these experiences related to India very beautifully in a book. There are about 760 pictures in his book named Indian Music. Most of these photographs have been taken by he himself. Such enthusiasm and fascination for Indian culture in other countries is really heartening.
Friends, a few weeks ago another news came which is going to fill us with pride. You will be pleased to know that in the last 8 years the export of musical instruments from India has increased three and a half times. Talking about Electrical Musical Instruments; their export has increased 60 times. This shows that the craze for Indian culture and music is increasing all over the world. The biggest buyers of Indian Musical Instruments are developed countries like USA, Germany, France, Japan and UK. It is a matter of fortune for all of us that our country has such a rich heritage of Music, Dance and Art.
Friends, we all know the great sage poet Bhartrihari for his ‘Niti Shatak’. In one of the verses he says that one’s attachment to art, music and literature is the real identity of humanity. In fact, our culture takes it above Humanity, to Divinity. In the Vedas, Samaveda has been called the source of our diverse music. Be it the Veena of Maa Saraswati, the flute of Bhagwan Krishna, or the Damru of Bholenath, our Gods and Goddesses are also attached with music. We Indians find music in everything. Be it the murmur of a river, the raindrops, the chirping of birds or the resonating sound of the wind, music is present everywhere in our civilization. This music relaxes not only the body, but also gives joy to the mind. Music also connects our society. If Bhangra and Lavani have a sense of fervor and joy, Rabindra Sangeet lifts our souls. Tribals across the country have different musical traditions. They inspire us to live in harmony with each other and with nature.
Friends, Our forms of music have not only enriched our culture, but have also left an indelible mark on the music of the world. The fame of Indian music has spread to every corner of the world. Let me play to you one more audio clip.
##(Song)##
You must be thinking that bhajan kirtan is being performed in some temple in the neighbourhood. But these notes have reached you from Guyana, a South American country thousands of miles away from India. In the 19th and 20th centuries, a large number of people from here went to Guyana. They also took many traditions of India with them from here. For example, as we celebrate Holi in India, in Guyana also the colors of Holi come alive with zest. Where there are colors of Holi, there is also the music of Phagwa that is Phagua. In Phagwa of Guyana there is a special tradition of singing wedding songs associated with Bhagwan Rama and Bhagwan Krishna. These songs are called Chautal. They are sung on the similar type of tune and at a high pitch as we do here. Not only this, Chautal Competitions are also held in Guyana. Similarly, many Indians, especially people from eastern Uttar Pradesh and Bihar, had gone to Fiji too. They used to sing traditional bhajan-kirtans, mainly couplets from the Ramcharitmanas. They also formed many Mandalis associated with bhajan-kirtan in Fiji. Even today there are more than two thousand Bhajan-Kirtan Mandalis in Fiji by the name of Ramayana Mandali. Today they can be seen in every village and locality.
I have given only a few examples here. If you see in the whole world, then this list of lovers of Indian music is very long.
My dear countrymen, we all always take pride in the fact that our country is home to the oldest traditions in the world. Therefore, it is also our responsibility to preserve our traditions and traditional knowledge, to promote it and to take it forward as much as possible. One such commendable effort is being made by some friends of our northeastern state of Nagaland. I liked this effort very much, so I thought, I’d share it with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Friends, the lifestyle of the Naga community in Nagaland, their art-culture and music attracts everyone. It is an important part of the glorious heritage of our country. The life of the people of Nagaland and their skills are also very important for a sustainable life style. In order to save these traditions and skills and pass them on to the next generation, the people there have formed an organization, that’s name is ‘Lidi-Cro-U’. ‘ The organization has undertaken the work of reviving beautiful facets of Naga culture which were on the verge of being lost. For example, Naga folk music is a very rich genre in itself. This organization has started the work of launching Naga Music Albums. So far, three such albums have been launched. These people also organize workshops related to folk music and folk dance. Youth are also given training for all these. Not only this, the youth are also trained in the traditional Nagaland style of apparel making, tailoring and weaving. Many types of products are made from bamboo in the Northeast. The youth of the new generation are also taught to make bamboo products. With this, these youth not only get connected with their culture, but also create new employment opportunities for them. People at Lidi-Cro-U try to make more and more people know about Naga folk-culture.
Friends, there will be such cultural styles and traditions in your region too. You too can make such efforts in your respective areas. If you are aware of any such unique effort being made somewhere, then you must share that information with me as well.
My dear countrymen, we it has been said here –
Vidyadhanam Sarva Dhanam Pradhanam
That is, if someone is donating knowledge, then he is doing the noblest work in the interest of the society. Even a small lamp lit in the field of education can illuminate the whole society. It gives me great pleasure to see that many such efforts are being made across the country today. Bansa is a village in Hardoi, 70-80 kilometres away from Lucknow, the capital of UP. I have come to know about Jatin Lalit Singh ji of this village, who is engaged in kindling the flame of education. Jatin ji had started a ‘Community Library and Resource Centre’ here two years ago.
, His centre has more than 3000 books related to Hindi and English literature, computer, law and preparing for many government exams. In this library, the choice of the children has also been taken full care of. Whether it is comic books or educational toys present here, children are very fond of them. Small children come here to learn new things while playing. Be it offline or online education, about 40 volunteers are busy guiding the students at this center. Everyday about 80 students of the village come to study in this library.
Friends, Sanjay Kashyap ji of Jharkhand is also giving new wings to the dreams of poor children. In his student life, Sanjay ji had to face the paucity of good books. In such a situation, he decided that, he would not let the future of the children of his region be dark, due to lack of books. Because of this mission, today he has become the ‘Library Man’ for children in many districts of Jharkhand. When Sanjay ji had started working, he had got the first library built at his native place. Wherever he was transferred during his job, he would get involved in the mission of opening a library for the education of poor and tribal children. While doing this, he has opened libraries for children in many districts of Jharkhand. His mission to open a library is taking the form of a social movement today. Be it Sanjay ji or Jatin ji, I especially appreciate them for their myriad such efforts.
My dear countrymen, the world of medical science has made a lot of progress with the help of research and innovation as well as state-of-the-art technology and equipment, but some diseases, even today, remain a big challenge for us. One such disease is – Muscular Dystrophy! It is mainly a genetic disease that can occur at any age, in which the muscles of the body begin to weaken. It becomes difficult for the patient to do even his small tasks of daily life. The treatment and care of such patients require great sense of service. We have such a centre at Solan in Himachal Pradesh, which has become a new ray of hope for the patients of Muscular Dystrophy. The name of this centre is ‘Manav Mandir’; it is being run by the Indian Association of Muscular Dystrophy. Manav Mandir is a wonderful example of human service true to its name. OPD and admission services for the patients started here three-four years ago. Manav Mandir also has the facility of beds for about 50 patients. Along with Physiotherapy, Electrotherapy, and Hydrotherapy, diseases are also treated here with the help of Yoga-Pranayama.
Friends, through all kinds of hi-tech facilities, this centre also tries to bring a positive change in the lives of the patients. A challenge associated with Muscular Dystrophy is also a lack of awareness about it. That’s why, this centre organizes awareness camps for patients not only in Himachal Pradesh but across the country. The most encouraging thing is that the management of this organization is mainly done by people suffering from this disease, like social worker, Urmila Baldi ji, President of Indian Association Of Muscular Dystrophy Sister Sanjana Goyal ji, and other members of this association. Shriman Vipul Goyal ji, who played an important role in the formation, is playing a very important role for this institution. Efforts are also on to develop Manav Mandir as a hospital and research centre. With this, patients will be able to get better treatment here. I heartily appreciate all the people trying in this direction, as well as wish the best for recovery of all the people suffering from Muscular Dystrophy.
My dear countrymen, the creative and social endeavours of the countrymen that we discussed in today’s ‘Mann Ki Baat’ are examples of the country’s energy and enthusiasm. Today every countryman is trying to do something different for the country in one field or the other, at every level. In today’s discussion itself, we saw that in an international event like G-20, one of our weaver companions understood his responsibility and came forward to fulfil it. Similarly, some are making efforts for the environment, others are working for water; many people are doing extraordinary work… from education, medicine and science technology to culture-traditions. This is because, today every citizen of ours is realising one’s duties. When such a sense of duty rises within the citizens of a nation, its golden future is automatically ensured, and, in the golden future of the country itself, also lies for all of us, a golden future.
I once again salute the countrymen for their efforts. We will meet again next month and will definitely talk about many more such encouraging topics. Do keep sending your suggestions and ideas. Many thanks to all of you!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today we are coming together for the ninety-sixth (96) episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The next episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will be the first episode of the year 2023. In the messages sent by you, you have also urged to speak about the departing 2022. Observation of the past always gives us inspiration for preparations for the present and the future. In 2022, the strength of the people of the country, their cooperation, their resolve, their expansion of success was of such magnitude that it would be difficult to include all of those in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. 2022 has indeed been very inspiring, wonderful in many ways. This year India completed 75 years of her independence and this very year Amritkal commenced. This year the country gained a new momentum, all the countrymen performed one better than the other. The various successes of 2022, today, have created a special place for India all over the world. 2022 i.e. India attaining the status of the world’s fifth largest economy; 2022, i.e. the record of India surpassing the incredible figure of 220 crore vaccines; 2022,i.e. India crossing the magical exports figure of 400 billion dollars; 2022, i.e. adopting the resolution of ‘Self-reliant India’ by the people, enliving it; 2022 meaning welcoming India’s first indigenous Aircraft Carrier INS Vikrant, 2022 meaning India’s glory in Space, Drone and Defence Sector, 2022 meaning India’s might in every field | Even in the field of sports, be it the Commonwealth Games, or the victory of our women’s hockey team, our youth have shown tremendous potential.
Friends, along with all this, the year 2022 will always be remembered for one more reason. This is the extension of the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. The people of the country also organized many amazing events to celebrate unity and togetherness. Be it the Madhavpur Mela in Gujarat, where Rukmini’s marriage, and Lord Krishna’s relationship with the Northeast is celebrated, or the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam, many colors of unity were visible in these festivals. In 2022, the countrymen have scripted another chapter of immortal history. Who can forget the ‘Har GharTiranga’ campaign organised in the month of August! Those were the moments giving every countryman goose bumps. In this campaign of 75 years of independence, the whole country assumed the hues of the tricolor. More than 6 crore people even sent selfies with the tricolor. This Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav will continue in the same way next year as well – it will further strengthen the foundation of Amrit Kaal.
Friends, this year India has also got the responsibility of chairing the G-20 group. I had also discussed this in detail last time. In the year 2023, we have to take the enthusiasm of G-20 to new heights; make this event a mass movement.
My dear countrymen, today the festival of Christmas is also being celebrated with great fervour all over the world. It is a day to remember the life and teachings of Jesus Christ. I wish you all a Merry Christmas.
Friends, today is also the birthday of our respected Atal Bihari Vajpayee ji. He was a great statesman who gave exceptional leadership to the country. He has a special place in the heart of every Indian. I have received a letter from Aasthaji from Kolkata. In this letter, she has mentioned about her recent visit to Delhi. She writes that during this, she took time out to visit the PM Museum. She liked Atal ji’s gallery very much in this museum. The picture clicked there with Atal ji has become memorable for her. In Atal ji’s gallery, we can have a glimpse of his valuable contribution to the country. Be it infrastructure, education or foreign policy, he strove to take India to new heights in every field. I once again solemnly bow to Atal ji from the core of my heart.
Friends, tomorrow, the 26th of December is ‘Veer Bal Diwas’ and I will have the privilege of participating in a programme dedicated to the martyrdom of Sahibzada Zorawar Singh ji and Sahibzada Fateh Singh ji in Delhi on this occasion. The country will always remember the sacrifice of Sahibzade and Mata Gujri.
My dear countrymen, it is said here –
Satyam kim pramanam, pratyaksham kim pramanam.
That is, truth does not require proof, what is evident also does not require proof.
But when it comes to modern Medical Science, the most important thing is – Evidence. Lack of evidence based research in the context of our scriptures like Yoga and Ayurveda has always been a challenge which has been a part of Indian life for centuries- results are visible, but evidence is not. But, I am happy that in the era of Evidence-based medicine, Yoga and Ayurveda are now standing up to the touchstone of tests of the modern era. All of you must have heard about the Tata Memorial center in Mumbai. This institute has earned a name for itself in Research, Innovation and Cancer care. An intensive research done by this center has revealed that yoga is very effective for breast cancer patients. Tata Memorial Center has presented the results of its research in the very prestigious Breast cancer conference held in America. These results have attracted the attention of the world’s biggest experts. Because, Tata Memorial center has conveyed with evidence how patients have benefited from Yoga. According to the research of this center, regular practice of yoga has reduced the risk of recurrence and death of breast cancer patients by 15 percent. This is the first example of Indian traditional medicine being tested vis a vis the stringent standards of Western methods. Also, this is the first study, in which yoga has been found to improve the quality of life in women affected by breast cancer. Its long term benefits have also come to the fore. The Tata Memorial Center has presented the results of its study at the European Society of Medical Oncology conference in Paris.
Friends, In today’s era, the more evidence-based Indian medical systems are, the more their acceptance will increase in the whole world. With this thought, an effort is also being made in Delhi’s AIIMS. Here, the Center for Integrative Medicine and Research was established six years ago to validate our traditional medical practices. Latest Modern Techniques and Research Methods are used in this. The center has already published 20 papers in reputed international journals. A paper published in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology describes the benefits of yoga for patients suffering from syncope. Similarly, in a Paper of Neurology Journal, in Migraine, the benefits of yoga have been explained. Apart from these, studies are being done regarding the benefits of yoga in many other diseases as well. Like Heart Disease, Depression, Sleep Disorder and problems faced by women during pregnancy.
Friends, a few days ago I was in Goa for the World Ayurveda Congress. Delegates from more than 40 countries participated in it and more than 550 Scientific Papers were presented here. Around 215 companies from around the world including India displayed their products in the exhibition here. In this expo which went on for four days, more than one lakh people enjoyed their experience related to Ayurveda. Even in the Ayurveda Congress, I reiterated the point for evidence based research to the Ayurveda experts gathered from all over the world. The way we all are seeing the power of Yoga and Ayurveda in this time of the Corona global pandemic, evidence-based research related to these will prove to be very significant. I also urge you that if you have any information about such efforts related to Yoga, Ayurveda and our traditional treatment methods, then do share them on social media.
My dear countrymen, in the last few years we have overcome many major challenges related to the health sector. Full credit for this goes to the willpower of our Medical Experts, Scientists and countrymen. We have eradicated diseases like Smallpox, Polio and ‘Guinea Worm’ from India.
Today, I would like to tell the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about another challenge, which is now about to end. This challenge, this disease is ‘Kala Azar’. The parasite of this disease is spread through the sting of the sand fly. When someone has ‘Kala Azar’, one has fever for months, there is anemia, the body becomes weak and the weight also decreases. This disease can happen to anyone from children to elders. But with everyone’s efforts, this disease named ‘Kala Azar’ is now getting eradicated rapidly. Till recently, the scourge of Kala-azar had spread in more than 50 districts across 4 states. But now this disease is confined to only 4 districts of Bihar and Jharkhand. I am sure, the strength and awareness of the people of Bihar-Jharkhand will help the government’s efforts to eliminate ‘Kala Azar’ from these four districts as well. I also urge the people of ‘Kala Azar’ affected areas to keep two things in mind. One is – control of sand fly, and second, diagnosis and complete treatment of this disease as soon as possible. The treatment of ‘Kala Azar’ is easy; the medicines used for this are also very effective. You just have to be alert. Do not be negligent if you have fever, and also keep spraying medicines that kill the sand fly. Just think, when our country will be free from ‘Kala Azar’, it will be a matter of joy for all of us. In this spirit of Sab ka Prayas, we are also working towards eradication of T.B. in India, by 2025. You must have seen, in the recent past, when the T.B. Mukt Bharat campaign started, thousands of people came forward to help the T.B. patients. These people, as Nikshay Mitras, are taking care of the patients, helping them financially. This power of public service and public participation achieves every difficult goal with certainty.
My dear countrymen, our tradition and culture have an unbreakable connection with Ma Ganga. Ganga water has been an integral part of our way of life and it is also said in our scriptures:-
Namami Gange Tav Paad Pankajam,
Sur Asurai: Vandit Divya Roopam |
Bhuktim cha muktim cha dadasi nityam,
Bhaav Anusaaren Sadaa Naraanaam ||
Meaning, O Mother Ganga! You bestow worldly happiness, bliss and salvation on your devotees according to their wishes. All worship your holy feet. I also offer my salutations at your holy feet. Amid that, it is a big responsibility of all of us to keep clean Mother Ganges that has been flowing for centuries. With this objective, eight years ago, we started the ‘Namami Gange Campaign’. It is a matter of pride for all of us that, today, this initiative of India is getting appreciation from all over the world. The United Nations has included the ‘Namami Gange’ mission in the world’s top ten initiatives to restore the ecosystem. It is even more heartening that ‘Namami Gange’ has received this honor among 160 such initiatives from all over the world.
Friends, the biggest source of energy behind the ‘Namami Gange’ campaign is the continuous participation of the people. In the ‘NamamiGange’ campaign, Ganga Praharis and Ganga Doots also have a big role to play. They are engaged in spreading awareness through planting trees, cleaning ghats, Ganga Aarti, street plays, painting and poems. A lot of improvement is also being seen in Biodiversity due to this campaign. There has been a significant increase in the number of different species of Hilsa fish, Gangetic dolphin and turtles. With Ganga’s ecosystem being clean, other livelihood opportunities are also increasing. Here I would like to discuss the ‘Jalaj Ajeevika Model’, which has been prepared keeping Biodiversity in mind. This Tourism-based Boat Safaris has been launched at 26 Locations.
Obviously, the spread of the ‘Namami Gange’ mission, its scope, has increased much more than the cleaning of the river. Whereas this evidence is direct proof of our willpower and tireless efforts, on the other hand, it is also going to show a new path to the world in the direction of environmental protection.
My dear countrymen, when the power of our resolve is strong, even the biggest challenge becomes easy. The example of this has been set by Sange Sherpa ji of Thegu village of Sikkim. For the last 14 years, he is engaged in the work of environmental protection at an altitude of more than 12,000 feet. Sange ji has taken up the task of keeping clean the Tsomgo (Somgo) lake that is of cultural and mythological importance. With his untiring efforts, he has changed the look and feel of this glacier lake. When Sange Sherpa ji started this campaign of cleanliness in the year 2008, he had to face many difficulties. But within no time, along with the youth and villagers, the panchayat also started offering full support in this noble work. Today, if you go to see the Tsomgolake, you will find huge garbage bins all around there. Now the garbage collected here is sent for recycling. Garbage bags made of cloth are also given to the tourists coming here so that the garbage is not strewn around. Now about 5 lakh tourists reach here every year to see this very clean lake. Sange Sherpa has also been honored by many organizations for this unique effort to conserve Tsomgo (Somgo) lake. Due to such efforts, today Sikkim is counted among the cleanest states of India. Along with Sange Sherpa ji and his colleagues, I also heartily appreciate the people engaged in the noble effort of environmental protection across the country.
Friends, I am happy that the ‘Swachh Bharat Mission’ has become firmly rooted in the mind of every Indian today. Since the inception of this mass movement in the year 2014, to take it to new heights, many unique efforts have been made by the people.
These efforts are being made not only within the society but also on part of the government. The result of these continuous efforts is that – due to the removal of garbage, removal of unnecessary items, a lot of space opens up in the offices, new space is available. Earlier, due to lack of space, offices had to be maintained on rent at far off places. These days, due to this cleanliness, so much space is available, that, now, all the offices are converging at one place. In the past, even the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting also made a lot of effort in its offices in Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Kolkata, Shillong in many cities and because of that, today they have two, three floors, available completely in usage anew. Due to this cleanliness in itself, we are getting the best experience of optimum utilizations of our resources. In the society as well as in the villages, cities and even in the offices; even for the country, this campaign is proving useful in every way.
My dear countrymen, a new awareness is dawning in our country about our art and culture, a new consciousness is awakening. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we often discuss such examples. Just as art, literature and culture are the collective capital of the society, in the same way, it is the responsibility of the whole society to take them forward. One such successful effort is being made in Lakshadweep. There is a club on Kalpeni Island – Kummel Brothers Challengers Club. This club inspires the youth to preserve the local culture and traditional arts. Here the youth are trained in the local art Kolkali, Parichakli, Kilipaat and traditional songs. That is, the old heritage is being protected in the hands of the new generation, is moving forward and friends, I am happy that such efforts are being made not only in the country but also abroad. Recently news came in from Dubai that the Kalari club there has registered its name in the Guinness Book of World Records. Anyone could think that if Dubai’s club set a record, what is its relation with India? Actually, this record is related to Kalaripayattu, the ancient martial art of India. This record is for the performance of Kalari by the maximum number of people simultaneously. Kalari club Dubai, together with Dubai Police, planned this and displayed it on the National Day of UAE. In this event, people ranging from 4 years old children to 60 years olds showed their best ability of Kalari. This is a wonderful example of how different generations are carrying forward an ancient tradition, with full inner enthusiasm.
Friends, I would also like to inform the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about ‘Quemashree’ ji, who lives in Gadak district of Karnataka. In the South, ‘Quemshree’ has been continuously engaged for the last 25 years in the mission of reviving the art-culture of Karnataka. You can imagine how great his Tpasya is! Earlier he was associated with the profession of Hotel Management. But, his attachment to his culture and tradition was so deep that he made it his mission. He created a platform by the name of ‘Kala Chetna’. This platform, today, organizes many programs of artists from Karnataka and from India and abroad. In this, many innovative endeavours are also undertaken to promote local art and culture.
Friends, this enthusiasm of the countrymen towards their art and culture is a manifestation of the feeling of ‘pride in our heritage’. In our country, there are so many such colors scattered in every corner. We should also work continuously to adorn and preserve them.
My dear countrymen, many beautiful and useful things are made from bamboo in many areas of the country. There are skilled bamboo artisans, skilled artists, especially in tribal areas. Ever since the country changed the British-era laws related to bamboo, a huge market has developed for it. Even in areas like Palghar in Maharashtra, tribal people make many beautiful products from bamboo. Things like boxes, chairs, teapots, baskets, and trays made of bamboo are becoming very popular. Not only this, these people also make beautiful clothes and decorations from bamboo grass. This is also providing employment to tribal women and their talent is also getting recognition.
Friends, a couple from Karnataka is sending many unique products made from betelnut fiber to the international market. This is a couple from Shivamogga in Karnataka – Shriman Suresh and his wife Shrimati Maithili. These people are making many decorative things ranging from trays, plates and handbags from betel nut fiber. Chappals made of this fiber are also being liked a lot today. Today their products are being sold in London and other markets of Europe. This is the very quality of our natural resources and traditional skills, which is being liked by everyone. In this traditional knowledge of India, the world is looking at ways of a sustainable future. We ourselves also need to be more and more aware in this direction. We ourselves should use such indigenous and local products and gift them to others as well. This will also strengthen our identity, strengthen the local economy, and, in large numbers, brighten the future of the people.
My dear countrymen, now we are slowly moving towards the unprecedented milestone of the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I have received letters from many countrymen, in which they have expressed great inquisitiveness about the 100th episode. I would like it if you send me your suggestions for what we should talk about in the 100th episode and how to make it special. Next time we will meet in the year 2023. I wish you all the best for the year 2023.
May this year also be special for the country, may the country keep touching new heights, and together we have to take a resolution as well as make it come true. At this time many people are also in the mood for holidays. Enjoy these festivals a lot, but be a little cautious too. You are also seeing that, Corona is increasing in many countries of the world, so we have to take more care of precautions like mask and hand washing. If we are careful, then we will also be safe and there will be no hindrance in our enjoyment. With this, once again many best wishes to all of you. Thank you very much, Namaskar.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. This is the first ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of 2023 and along with it, it is also the ninety-seventh episode of the programme. It gives me great pleasure to interact with all of you once again. Every year, the month of January is quite eventful. This month, around the 14th of January, the glitter of festivals abound across the country from north to south and from east to west. After this, the country also celebrates her Republic Day. This time also many aspects of the Republic Day celebrations are being praised a lot. Pulkit from Jaisalmer writes to me that it was great to see the workers who built the Kartavya path during the 26thJanuary parade. Jaya from Kanpur writes that she enjoyed seeing different aspects of Indian culture in the tableaux included in the parade. Women Camel Riders and the women contingent of CRPF, who took part in this parade for the first time, are also being highly appreciated.
Friends, Vatsal ji from Dehradun has written to me that I always wait for the 25th of January because the Padma Awards are announced that day; and in a way, the evening of the 25thitself raises my enthusiasm for the 26thJanuary. Many people have also shared their feelings about People’s Padma to those who have achieved through their dedication and service at the grassroots level. This time there has been a good representation of the tribal community and people associated with tribal life among the Padma awardees. Tribal life is different from the hustle and bustle of the cities; its challenges are also different. Despite this, tribal societies are always ready to preserve their traditions. Efforts are also made to preserve and research aspects related to tribal communities. Similarly, many great personalities who have worked on tribal languages like Toto, Ho, Kui, Kuvi and Manda have received Padma Awards. It is a matter of pride for all of us. Dhani Ram Toto, Janum Singh Soy and B. Ramakrishna Reddy ji…the whole country has become familiar with them now. People working with tribals like Siddhi, Jarawa and Onge have also been honoured this time. Such as…Hirabai Lobi, Ratan Chandra Kar and Ishwar Chandra Verma Ji. Tribal communities have been an integral part of our land, our heritage. Their contribution in the development of the country and society is very important. Honouring the personalities who worked for them, will also inspire the new generation. This year the echoes of the Padma Awards are being heard even in those areas which used to be Naxal affected. Due to their efforts, those who show the right path to the misguided youth in Naxalite affected areas have been honoured with Padma awards. For this, Ajay Kumar Mandavi, who does wood carving in Kanker, and Parshuram Komaji Khune, associated with the famous Jharipatti Rangbhoomi of Gadchiroli, have also received this honour. Similarly, Ramkuiwangbe Niume, Bikram Bahadur Jamatia and Karma Wangchu, who are involved in the preservation of their culture in the North-East, have also been honoured.
Friends, there are many people who have enriched the world of music among those who have been honoured with the Padma Awards this time. Who does not like music? Everyone’s choice of music may be different, but music is a part of everyone’s life. This time among the Padma awardees are those people who have expertise in spreading the melody of our traditional musical instruments like Santoor, Bamhum, Dwitara. Ghulam Mohammad Zaz, Moa Su-Pong, Ri-Singhbor Kurka-Long, Muni-Venkatappa and Mangal Kanti Rai are just a few of the names that are being discussed all around.
Friends, many Padma awardees are those friends among us, who always kept the country paramount, dedicating their lives to the principle of “Nation first”. They remained engaged in their work with devotion and never expected any reward for it. The satisfaction on the face of those for whom they are working is the biggest award for them. The pride of our countrymen has risen by honouring such dedicated people. I may not be able to take the names of all the Padma awardees here, but I definitely request you to know in detail about the inspirational life of these Padma awardees and tell others as well.
Friends, today when we are discussing our Republic Day during the Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav, I will also mention an interesting book here. A very interesting subject has been discussed in this book which I received a few weeks ago. The name of this book is India – The Mother of Democracy and it has many excellent essays. India is the largest democracy in the world and we Indians are also proud of the fact that our country is also the Mother of Democracy. Democracy is in our veins, it is in our culture – it has been an integral part of our work for centuries. By nature, we are a Democratic Society. Dr. Ambedkar had compared the Buddhist monks union to the Indian Parliament. He described it as an institution where there were many rules for Motions, Resolutions, Quorum, Voting and counting of votes. Babasaheb believed that Lord Buddha must have got inspiration from the political systems of that time.
There is a small but famous village in Tamil Nadu – Utirmerur. Here an inscription of 1100-1200 years ago surprises the whole world. This rock-edict is like a mini-constitution. It has been explained in detail how the Gram Sabha should be conducted and what the procedure for selection of its members shall be. Another example of Democratic Values in the history of our country is the Anubhav Mandapam of Lord Basaveshwara of the 12thcentury. Here, free debate and discussion were encouraged. You will be surprised to know that it is even before the Magna Carta. The republican traditions of the Kakatiya dynasty kings of Warangal were also very famous. The Bhakti movement furthered the culture of democracy in western India. An article has also been included in the book on the democratic spirit of the Sikh Panth which throws light on the decisions taken by the consensus of Guru Nanak Dev Ji. The book also has good information on community driven and consensus driven decision making – in Oraon and Munda tribes of central India. After reading this book, you will feel how the spirit of democracy has been flowing in every part of the country for centuries. As the Mother of Democracy, we should constantly think deeply about this topic, discuss it and also inform the world. This will further strengthen the spirit of democracy in the country.
My dear countrymen, if I ask you, what is common between Yoga Day and our different types of coarse grains – Millets, then you might think…what is this comparison? If I say that both have a lot in common, you will be surprised. In fact, the United Nations has taken the decision of both International Yoga Day and International Year of Millets after India’s proposal. Secondly, yoga is also related to health and millets also play an important role in health. The third thing is more important – a revolution is on the way because of public participation in both campaigns. Just as people have made yoga and fitness a part of their lives by taking active participation on a large scale; similarly people are adopting millets on a large scale. People are now making millets a part of their diet. A huge impact of this change is also visible. On the one hand, the small farmers who traditionally used to produce millets are very excited. They are very happy that the world has now started understanding the importance of millets. On the other hand, FPOs and entrepreneurs have started efforts to market millets and make them available to people.
A resident of Nandyal district of Andhra Pradesh, K.V. Rama Subba Reddy Ji left a well paying job for the sake of millets. The taste of millets made by his mother’s hands was such that he started a millet processing unit in his village. Subba Reddy ji also explains the benefits of millets to the people and also makes it easily available. Sharmila Oswal, a resident of Kenad village near Alibaug in Maharashtra, has been contributing in a unique way in the production of millets for the last 20 years. She is imparting training in smart agriculture to farmers. Her efforts have not only increased the yield of millets, but also increased the income of the farmers.
If you get a chance to visit Raigarh in Chhattisgarh, you must visit the Millets Cafe here. Items like Chilla, Dosa, Momos, Pizza and Manchurian are becoming very popular in this Millets Cafe which started a few months back.
May I ask you one more thing? You must have heard the word entrepreneur, but have you heard Milletpreneurs? Milletpreneurs of Odisha are in the limelight these days. A Self Help Group of about 1500 women of the tribal district Sundergarh is associated with the Odisha Millets Mission. Here women are making everything from millets… to cookies, rasgulla, gulab jamun, and even cakes. Due to their great demand in the market, the income of women is also increasing.
The Aland Bhootai (Aland Bhutai) Millets Farmers Producer Company started work last year under the supervision of the Indian Institute of Millets Research in Kalaburgi, Karnataka. People are liking the khakra, biscuits and laddoos here. In Karnataka’s Bidar district, women associated with the Hulsoor Millet Producer Company are cultivating millets as well as preparing their flour. Through this, their earnings have also increased a lot. Farmers from 12 states have joined the FPO of Chhattisgarh’s Sandeep Sharma, who is associated with natural farming. This FPO of Bilaspur is making 8 types of millets flour and their dishes.
Friends, Today G-20 summit events are going on in every corner of India and I am happy that in every corner of the country, wherever the G-20 summit is being held, nutritious and tasty dishes made from millets are included in it. Dishes like Bajra-khichdi, poha, kheer and roti, as well as Ragi-based payasam, puri and dosa are also served here. Health drinks, cereals and noodles made from millets were showcased in the Millets Exhibitions at all G20 venues. Indian Missions around the world are also making a lot of efforts to increase their popularity. You can imagine that this effort of the country and the increasing demand of Millets in the world is going to give strength to our small farmers. It gives joy to me to see that the variety of new things that have started being made from Millets today is being liked equally by the young generation. I also congratulate the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ for such a wonderful start to the International Year of Millets and for relentlessly taking it forward.
My dear countrymen, what comes to your mind when someone talks about the Tourist Hub Goa?
Naturally, as soon as the name of Goa is referred to; first of all, the beautiful Coastline, Beaches and favourite food items come to mind. But something happened in Goa this month, which is in the headlines. Today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I want to share this with all of you. This event happened in Goa – Purple Fest. This fest was organized in Panaji from 6 to 8 January. This was a unique effort in itself for the welfare of the divyangs. How big an occasion Purple Fest was, you can all guess from the fact that more than 50 thousand brothers and sisters of ours participated in it. The people who came here were thrilled about the fact that they could now enjoy the ‘Miramar Beach’ to the fullest. In fact, ‘Miramar Beach’ has become one of the accessible beaches of Goa for our Divyang brothers and sisters. Along with a Cricket Tournament, Table Tennis Tournament, Marathon Competition, a Deaf-Blind Convention was also organized here. Apart from the Unique Bird Watching Program, a film was also shown here. Special arrangements were made for this, so that all our Divyang brothers and sisters and children could enjoy it to the fullest.
One special thing about Purple Fest was the participation of the private sector of the country in it. Products which are Divyang Friendly were showcased on their behalf. Many efforts were seen in this fest to raise awareness about the welfare of the divyangs. For making Purple Fest a success, I congratulate all the people who participated in it. Along with this, I also congratulate those volunteers, who came together to work day and night to organize this. I have full faith that such campaigns will prove to be very effective in realizing our Vision of Accessible India.
My dear countrymen, now in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I will talk on a topic, in which you will feel joy and pride and your mind will say – Wow what a joy! One of the oldest Science Institutions in the country, the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, i.e. IISc, is presenting a wonderful example. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I have discussed earlier, how the two great personalities of India, Jamsetji Tata and Swami Vivekananda, have been the inspiration behind the establishment of this institution. And a matter of joy and pride for us is that in the year 2022, there have been a total of 145 patents in the name of this institute. This means – two patents every five days. This record is amazing in itself. I would also like to congratulate the team of IISc for this success. Friends, Today India’s ranking is 7th in Patent Filing and 5th in Trademarks. Talking about patents only, there has been an increase of about 50 percent in the last five years. In the Global Innovation Index too, India’s ranking has improved tremendously and now it has reached 40th position, while in 2015, India was behind even the 80th position in the Global Innovation Index. I want to tell you one more interesting thing. For the first time in the last 11 years in India, the number of Domestic Patent Filing was seen more than Foreign Filing. It also shows the growing scientific prowess of India.
Friends, we all know that knowledge is paramount in the global economy of the 21st century. I believe that the dream of India’s Techade will definitely be fulfilled on the strength of our Innovators and their Patents. With this, we all will be able to take full advantage of world class technology and products prepared in our own country.
My dear countrymen, I saw a post on NaMoApp by engineer Vijay ji from Telangana. In this, Vijayji has written about E-Waste. Vijay ji requests that I discuss this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Earlier too in this programme we have talked about ‘Waste to Wealth’ i.e. ‘Kachre se Kanchan’, but come, today, let’s discuss E-Waste related to this.
Friends, today devices like Mobile Phone, Laptop, Tablet have become common in every household. Their number will be in Billions across the country. Today’s latest devices are also future’s E-Waste. Whenever someone buys a new device or replaces one’s old device, it becomes necessary to keep in mind whether it is discarded properly or not. If E-Waste is not disposed of properly, it can also harm our environment. But, if done carefully, it can become a great force in the Circular Economy of Recycle and Reuse. It was mentioned in a United Nations report that 50 million tonnes of E-Waste is being thrown every year. Can you guess how much? Even if the weight of all the commercial planes that have been built in the history of mankind is combined, it will not equal the amount of E-Waste being released. It is like every second 800 laptops are being thrown away. You will be amazed to know that about 17 types of Precious Metals can be extracted from this E-Waste through different processes. This includes Gold, Silver, Copper and Nickel, so utilizing E-Waste is no less than making ‘Kachre Ko Kanchan’. Today there is no dearth of start-ups that are doing innovative work in this direction. At present, around 500 E-Waste Recyclers are associated with this sector and many new entrepreneurs are also being associated with it. This sector has also given direct employment to thousands of people. E-Parisaraa of Bengaluru is engaged in one such effort. It has developed an indigenous technology for extracting precious metals from Printed Circuit Boards.
Similarly, Ecoreco working in Mumbai has developed a system to collect E-Waste through a Mobile App. Attero Recycling of Roorkee, Uttarakhand has obtained many patents in this field worldwide. It has also earned a lot of awards by preparing its own E-Waste Recycling Technology. Tonnes of E-Waste are being collected in Bhopal through a Mobile App and the Website ‘Kabadiwala’. There are many such examples. All these are helping to make India a Global Recycling Hub; but, there is also an essential condition for the success of such Initiatives – that is, people have to be made aware about safe useful methods of disposal of E-Waste. Those working in the field of E-Waste say that at present, only 15-17 percent E-Waste is being recycled every year.
My dear countrymen, today there is a lot of talk about climate change and conservation of Biodiversity all over the world. We have been continuously talking about India’s concrete efforts in this direction. You will also be very happy to know the work that India has done for its wetlands. Some listeners might be wondering what wetlands are ? ‘Wetland sites’ means those places where water remains accumulated throughout the year on marshy soil-like land. A few days later, on February 2, it is World Wetlands Day. Wetlands are very important for the existence of our earth, because many birds and animals depend on them. Along with enriching Biodiversity, they also ensure Flood control and Ground Water Recharge. Many of you must be knowing that Ramsar Sites are such wetlands which are of International Importance. Wetlands may be there in any country; but they have to fulfill many criteria; only then are they declared as Ramsar Sites. Ramsar Sites should have 20,000 or more water birds. It is important to have a large number of local fish species. On 75 years of independence during the Amrit Mahotsav, I would like to share with you some good information related to Ramsar Sites. Now the total number of Ramsar Sites in our country has increased to 75, whereas, before 2014 there were only 26 Ramsar Sites in the country. For this, the local community deserves congratulations, who have preserved this Biodiversity. It is also a tribute to our age-old culture and tradition of living in harmony with nature. These wetlands of India are also an example of our natural potential. Chilika Lake of Odisha is known to shelter more than 40 waterbird species. Kaibul-Lamjaa, Loktak is considered to be the only natural habitat of the Swamp Deer.
Vedanthangal of Tamil Nadu was declared a Ramsar Site in 2022. The entire credit for preserving the bird population here goes to the farmers in the neighbourhood. The Panjath Nag community in Kashmir spends a day specially cleaning the village spring during the Annual Fruit Blossom festival. Most of the Words Ramsar Sites also have a Unique cultural heritage. Manipur’s cultures have a deep connection with Loktak and the sacred lake Renuka. Similarly, Sambhar is also related to Shakambhari Devi, an incarnation of Maa Durga. This expansion of Wetlands in India is possible because of the people who live around Ramsar Sites. I greatly appreciate all such people, on behalf of the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, and wish them all the best.
My dear countrymen, this time in our country, especially in North India, there was severe winter. In this winter, people also enjoyed snowfall on the mountains. Some pictures came in from Jammu and Kashmir which captivated hearts in the entire country. People from all over the world are liking these pictures on social media. Due to snowfall, our Kashmir valley has become very beautiful like every year this time too! People also particularly like the video of the train going from Banihal to Budgam. Beautiful snowfall, white sheet like snow all around. People are saying that this scene looks like a fairy tale! Many people are saying that these are not pictures of any foreign country, but of Kashmir in our own country.
A social media user has written – ‘What would be more beautiful than this heaven?’ This is absolutely correct – that is why Kashmir is called heaven on earth. Seeing these pictures, you too must be thinking of going on a trip to Kashmir. I would like you to go there yourself and take your friends along. Snow-capped mountains in Kashmir, along with natural beauty; there are many more things to see and know. For example, Winter Games were organized in Syedabad, Kashmir. The theme of these Games was – Snow Cricket! You might be thinking that Snow Cricket would be a very exciting game –and you are absolutely right.
Kashmiri youth make cricket even more amazing in the snow. Through this, there is also a search for young players in Kashmir, who will later play as Team India. In a way, this is also an extension of the Khelo India Movement. In Kashmir, there is a lot of enthusiasm among the youth regarding sports. In the coming times, many of these youth will win medals for the country, and will hoist the tricolor. I would suggest that the next time you plan a trip to Kashmir, take out time to visit such events. These experiences will make your trip even more memorable.
My dear countrymen, our efforts to strengthen our Republic should go on relentlessly. The Republic becomes strong ‘by public participation’, ‘by everyone’s effort’, ‘by performing one’s duties towards the country’, and I am satisfied that, our ‘Mann Ki Baat’, is the emphatic voice of such dutiful fighters. We will meet again next time with interesting and inspiring stories of such dedicated people.
Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. I am feeling very happy to join you all in this 98th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. In this journey towards a century, all of you have made ‘Mann Ki Baat’ a wonderful platform as an expression of public participation. Every month, in millions of messages, the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of lots of people reaches out to me. You know the power of your mind… Similarly, how the might of the country increases with the strength of the society…this we have seen and understood in different episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. And I have experienced it – have also accepted it. I remember the day when we talked about encouraging traditional sports of India in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Immediately at that time, a wave arose in the country to join Indian Sports, to enjoy them, to learn them. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, when we referred to Indian toys, the people of the country promoted this too, readily. Nowadays, Indian toys have become such a craze that their demand has increased even in foreign countries. When we spoke of Indian genres of story-telling in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, their fame also reached far and wide. People started getting attracted towards the Indian story-telling genre, more and more.
Friends, you might remember that on Sardar Patel’s birth anniversary i.e. ‘Unity Day’, we talked of three competitions in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. These competitions, ‘Geet’ – Patriotic Songs, ‘Lullabies’ and ‘Rangoli’ were associated with it. I am glad to inform you, that more than 5 lakh people from more than 700 districts across the country have participated in this enthusiastically. Children, adults and the elderly enthusiastically participated and entries have been sent in more than 20 languages. Many many congratulations to all the participants in these competitions from my side. Each one of you, in your own right is a champion, an art seeker. You all have shown how much love you have for the diversity and culture of your country.
Friends, today on this occasion it is very natural for me to remember Lata Mangeshkar ji, Lata Didi. Because on the day that this competition had started, Lata Didi had urged the countrymen by tweeting that they must join this endeavour.
Friends, in the lullaby writing competition, the first prize has been won by B.M. Manjunath ji of Chamrajnagar district in Karnataka. He received this award for his lullaby ‘Malagu Kanda’ written in Kannada. He got the inspiration to write this from the lullabies sung by his mother and grandmother. Listen to it, you will enjoy it too.
[Kannada Sound Clip (35 seconds)]
“Sleep, sleep, baby,
Sleep, my smart darling,
The day is gone and it is dark,
The goddess of sleep will arrive,
From the garden of the stars,
Will carve out dreams for you!
Go to sleep, Go to sleep,
Jojo…jo..jo..
Jojo…jo..jo..”
Dinesh Gowala, a resident of Kamrup district in Assam, has won the second prize in this competition. The lullaby he has written bears a reflection of the popular craft of the artisans who make clay and pot vessels locally.
[Assamese Sound Clip (35 seconds)]
Brother Potter has brought a bag,
Say, What’s in the bag?
Opened it and saw the potter’s bag,
There was a lovely bowl in the bag!
Our doll asked the potter,
What is this little bowl!
Just like songs and lullabies, the Rangoli Competition also turned out to be quite popular. The participants made many a beautiful Rangoli, one better than the other. In this, the winning entry proved to be that of Kamal Kumar from Punjab. He made very beautiful Rangoli of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose and Amar Shaheed Veer Bhagat Singh. Sachin Narendra Avsari ji of Sangli Maharashtra, in his Rangoli, has depicted Jallianwala Bagh, the massacre and the bravery of Shaheed Udham Singh. Gurudutt Vantekar, a resident of Goa, made a Rangoli on Gandhiji, while Malathiselvam ji of Puducherry also focused on many great freedom fighters. The winner of the patriotic song competition, T. Vijay Durga ji is from Andhra Pradesh. She had sent her entry in Telugu. She has been greatly inspired by Narasimha Reddy Garu ji, the famous freedom fighter of her region. Do listen to this part of Vijay Durga ji’s entry
[Telugu Sound Clip (27 seconds)]
The Sun of Renadu State,
O brave Narasimha!
You are the seedling of the Indian Freedom Struggle and the restraint!
Look at the unjust and the autocratic repression tendencies of the British.
Your blood ignited and fire sprang up!
The Sun of Renadu State,
O brave Narasimha!
After Telugu, I will now make you listen to a clip in Maithili. It has been sent by Deepak Vats ji. He has also won a prize in this competition.
[Maithili Sound Clip (30 seconds)]
India is the pride of the world brother,
Our country is great
Surrounded by seas on three sides,
Kailash is strong in the north,
Ganga, Yamuna, Krishna, Kaveri,
Koshi, Kamla Balan,
Our country is great brother
Our life sustenance is our Tricolour!
Friends, I hope you have liked them. The list of such entries that entered the competition is very long. While visiting the website of the Ministry of Culture, do watch and listen to them with your family – you will be greatly inspired.
My dear countrymen, whether it is about Banaras or the Shehnai or Ustad Bismillah Khan ji, it is natural that my attention will be drawn in that direction. A few days ago, ‘Ustad Bismillah Khan Yuva Puraskar’ were conferred. These awards were given away to emerging, talented artists in the field of music and performing arts. These, along with the rising popularity of the art and music world are also contributing in their enrichment. These also include artists who have breathed new life into those instruments, whose popularity was decreasing with time. Listen carefully now to this tune.
[Sound Clip (21 seconds) Instrument- ‘Sursingar’, Artist -Joydeep Mukherjee]
Do you know what instrument this is? It could be possible that you may not be aware of it! The name of this musical instrumental mantra is ‘Sursingar’ and this tune has been composed by Joydeep Mukherjee. Joydeep ji is among the youth honored with the Ustad Bismillah Khan Award. It had become rare to hear tunes of this instrument since the late 50’s and 60’s. But, Joydeep is persevering towards making the Sursingar popular once again. Similarly, the efforts of sister Uppalpu Nagmani ji are also very inspiring, who has been awarded in the category of Carnatic Instrumental on the Mandolin. On the other hand, Sangram Singh Suhas Bhandare ji has been awarded for Warkari Kirtan. This list doesn’t just pertain to music artistes – V Durga Devi ji has won this award for ‘Karakattam’, an ancient dance form. Another winner of the award, Raj Kumar Nayak ji, organized the Perini Odissi, which lasted for 101 days in 31 districts of Telangana. Today, people have started knowing him by the name of Perini Rajkumar. Perini Natyam, a dance dedicated to Lord Shiva, was quite popular during the Kakatiya Dynasty. The roots of this dynasty are still associated with Telangana. There is another award winner – Saikhom Surchandra Singh. He is known for his mastery in making Meitei Pung Instrument. This instrument has connections with Manipur. Pooran Singh is a Divyang Artist, who is popularizing various Music Forms such as – Rajula-Malushahi, Nyuli, Hudka Bol, Jagar. He has also prepared many audio recordings related to them. The talented folk music artist of Uttarakhand, Puran Singh ji has also won many awards. Due to the limitation of time, I may not be able to talk about all the awardees here, but I am sure that you will definitely read about them. I hope that all these artists will continue to inspire everyone at the grassroots towards making performing arts more popular.
My dear countrymen, in our fast moving country, the power of Digital India is visible in every corner. Different apps play a big role in taking the power of Digital India to every home. There is one such App, E-Sanjeevani. Through this App Tele-consultation, that is, while sitting far away, through video conference, you can consult a doctor about your illness. Till now, the number of tele-consultants using this app has crossed the figure of 10 crores. You can imagine!… 10 crore Consultations through video conference….An amazing bond between patient and doctor – this is a big achievement. For this achievement, I congratulate all the doctors and patients who have availed of this facility. This is a living example of how the people of India have made technology a part of their lives. We have seen that in the time of Corona, E-Sanjeevani App has proved to be a great boon for the people. It also occurred to me…. Why not talk about this in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with a doctor and a patient, communicate and convey the matter to you all!. Let us try to know how effective Tele-consultation has been for the people. With us is Dr. Madan Mani ji from Sikkim. Dr. Madan Mani hails from Sikkim itself, but did his MBBS from Dhanbad and then did his MD from Banaras Hindu University. He has provided tele-consultation to hundreds of people in rural areas.
Prime Minister: Namaskar… Namaskar Madan Mani ji.
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji Namaskar Sir.
Prime Minister: This is Narendra Modi speaking!
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes… Yes Sir.
Prime Minister: You have studied in Banaras.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, I have studied in Banaras, Sir
Prime Minister: Your medical education took place there.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes… Yes.
Prime Minister: So, did you ever go to see the Banaras of that time when you were there earlier and the changed Banaras of today?
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji Prime Minister ji, I have not been able to visit since I have come back to Sikkim, but I have heard that a lot has changed.
Prime Minister: So how many years have passed since you left Banaras?
Dr. Madan Mani: I have left Banaras since 2006 sir.
Prime Minister: O… then you must go.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes… Yes.
Prime Minister: Well, I called because you are providing great services of teleconsultation to the people of Sikkim, living in remote mountains.
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji
Prime Minister: I would like to share your experience with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes.
Prime Minister: Tell me, how was the experience?
Dr. Madan Mani: It was a great experience Prime Minister ji…The fact is the nearest PHC in Sikkim… To go there also people have to board a vehicle and carry at least one or two hundred rupees. And whether a doctor would be available… this is also a problem. So through Tele Consultation, we connect directly with people….with people from faraway places. The CHOs of Health & Wellness Centres get them connected with us. And they tell us the reports of their old ailments, their present condition…. everything.
Prime Minister: That means you transfer the documents!
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes…Yes… We also transfer documents and if they are unable to transfer, they read out and tell us.
Prime Minister: The doctor of the Wellness Center there conveys!
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, the CHO who lives in the Wellness Center, Community Health Officer.
Prime Minister: And the one who is a patient tells you about his difficulties directly.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, the patient also tells us about his difficulties. Then after seeing the old records, if we want to know any new things. For example, one has to auscultate someone’s chest… if his feet are swollen or not? If the CHO has not seen it, then we tell him to go and see whether there is swelling or not, look at the eyes, whether he has anaemia or not, if he has cough, then auscultate the chest and find out whether there are sounds there or not.
Prime Minister: Do you talk through Voice Call or do you also use Video Call?
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, we use Video Call.
Prime Minister: So you see the patient as well.
Dr. Madan Mani: Can see the patient also, sir.
Prime Minister: What feeling does the patient get?
Dr. Madan Mani: The patient likes it because he can see the doctor closely. He is confused whether his medicine has to be increased or decreased, because most of the patients in Sikkim are of diabetes and hypertension and how far he will have to go to find a doctor to change the medicine for diabetes and hypertension. But through Tele Consultation, it is available there and medicine is also available through Free Drugs initiative in the Health & Wellness Center. So, the patient avails of the medicine from there itself.
Prime Minister: Well Madan Mani ji, you know that the patient has a tendency that until the doctor comes; until the doctor sees him; he is not satisfied and the doctor also feels that he will have to see the patient. Now since all the consultations there are done through Telecom, what does the doctor feel; what does the patient feel?
Dr. Madan Mani: Ji… we also feel that if the patient feels that he should see the doctor, then whatever things we want to see, we, by speaking to CHO, in the video only, we ask to see. And sometimes, by coming close to the patient in the video itself, the problems he is facing, if someone has a skin problem, then he shows us through the video itself. So those people remain satisfied.
Prime Minister: And later after treating him, does he get satisfaction… what does he feel? Are patients getting well?
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, I get a lot of satisfaction. We also get satisfaction sir. Because I am currently in the health department and simultaneously do tele-consultation… it is a very good, pleasant experience for me to see the patient along with the file.
Prime Minister: On an average, how many patients would be there through Tele Consultation cases?
Dr. Madan Mani: So far I have seen 536 patients.
Prime Minister: Oh… that means you have mastered it a lot.
Dr. Madan Mani: Yes, it feels good.
Prime Minister: Okay, I wish you all the best. By using this technology, you are doing such a great service to the people living in the remote forests and mountains of Sikkim. And it is a matter of joy that such a good use of technology is being made even in the far-flung areas of our country. Fine… many congratulations to you from my side.
Dr. Madan Mani: Thank You!
Friends, it is clear from the words of Dr. Madan Mani how E-Sanjeevani App is helping them. After Dr. Madan ji, we now join another Madan ji. This is Madan Mohan Lal ji, a resident of Chandauli district of Uttar Pradesh. Now it is also a coincidence that Chandauli is also adjacent to Banaras. Come, let us know from Madan Mohan ji what his experience as a patient regarding E-Sanjeevani has been!
Prime Minister: Madan Mohan ji, Pranam!
Madan Mohan ji: Namaskar, Namaksar Sir!
Prime Minister: Namaskar! Well, I have been told that you are a diabetic patient.
Madan Mohan ji: Yes…yes
Prime Minister: And you take help of technology regarding your illness through teleconsultation!
Madan Mohan ji: Ji..ji
Prime Minister: As a patient, I want to listen to your experiences, so that I would like to convey to our countrymen how the people living in our villages can use today’s technology. Tell me, how do you do it?
Madan Mohan ji: It is like this Sir, hospitals are far away and when I got diabetes, I had to travel 5-6 kms away to get treatment done…to consult on it. And since the arrangement has been made by you, means that I go now, I am examined, it also makes us talk to doctors from outside and also provides us medicines. It is of great benefit to me and other people are also benefited by it.
Prime Minister: So every time is it the same doctor that sees you or the doctors keep changing?
Madan Mohan ji: Since they don’t understand, they show it to the doctor. It talks to us and makes us talk to another doctor.
Prime Minister: And the guidance that doctors give you, you get full benefit from it?
Madan Mohan ji: We are benefited. We have a great benefit through that. And the people of the village also benefit from it. Everyone there asks that brother, we have BP, we have sugar, test, check, tell us about the medicine. And earlier they used to go 5-6 kilometres away… there used to be long queues… there used to be queues in Pathology. There used to be a loss of an entire day’s time.
Prime Minister: Meaning, your time is also saved.
Madan Mohan ji: And money was also wasted and here all services are being done free of cost.
Prime Minister: Well, when you see the doctor in person, in front of you, a trust is formed. Okay…here’s a doctor, he has checked my pulse, my eyes… he has also checked my tongue. So it’s a different feeling. Now if they do Tele Consultation, do you get the same satisfaction?
Madan Mohan ji: Yes, there is satisfaction. I feel that they feel our pulse, check with a stethoscope, and I feel very happy that well…Such a good arrangement has been made by you… We earlier had to go there with difficulty, paying for transport fare…Had to line up in a queue there…Now, we are getting all the facilities sitting at home.
Prime Minister: Well, Madan Mohan ji, I wish you all the best. Even at this stage of age, you have learned technology, you use technology. Tell others too so that their time is saved… money too is saved and through whatever guidance they get, medicines can also be used in a better way.
Madan Mohan ji: Yes, of course!
Prime Minister: Fine, my best wishes to you Madan Mohan ji.
Madan Mohan ji: Sir, you have made Banaras Kashi Vishwanath Station, developed it. Our congratulations to you on that!
Prime Minister: I thank you. What have we made? The people of Banaras have made Banaras. Otherwise, we have been called by Mother Ganga to serve Mother Ganga, that’s all, nothing else. Ok ji, many best wishes to you. Pranam ji
Madan Mohan ji: Namaskar Sir!
Prime Minister: Namaskar ji!
Friends, E-Sanjeevani is becoming a life-saving app for the common man of the country, for the middle class, for the people living in hilly areas. This is the power of India’s digital revolution. And today we are seeing its effect in every field. You also know the power of India’s UPI. Many countries of the world are drawn towards it. Just a few days ago, UPI-Pay Now Link has been launched between India and Singapore. Now, people of Singapore and India are transferring money from their mobile phones in the same way as they do within their respective countries. I am glad that people have started taking advantage of it. Be it India’s E-SanjeevaniApp or UPI, these have proved to be very helpful in raising the Ease of Living.
My dear countrymen, when a species of bird, a living being which is going extinct in a country is saved, it is discussed all over the world. There are many such great traditions in our country which had disappeared, had been removed from the minds and hearts of the people, but now efforts are being made to revive them with the power of public participation, so for discussing that… What better platform than ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
What I am going to tell you now will make you really happy…you will be proud of our heritage. Shriman Kanchan Banerjee, who lives in America, has drawn my attention to one such campaign related to the preservation of heritage. I congratulate him. Friends, this month, ‘Tribeni Kumbho Mohotshav’ was organized in Bansberia of Hooghly district in West Bengal. More than eight lakh devotees participated in it…But do you know why it is so special? It is special, since this practice has been revived after 700 years. Although this tradition is thousands of years old, but unfortunately this festival which used to take place in Tribeni, Bengal was stopped 700 years ago. It should have been started after independence, but that too could not happen. Two years ago, the festival has been started again by the local people and through ‘Tribeni Kumbho Porichalona Shomiti’. I congratulate all the people associated with its organization. You are not only keeping alive a tradition, but are also protecting the cultural heritage of India.
Friends, Tribeni in West Bengal has been known as a holy place for centuries. It finds mention in various Mangalakavya, Vaishnava literature, Shakta literature and other Bangla literary works. Various historical documents suggest that this region was once a centre of Sanskrit, education and Indian culture. Many saints consider it a holy place for Kumbh Snan on Magh Sankranti. In Tribeni, you will find many Ganga Ghats, Shiva temples and ancient buildings decorated with terracotta architecture. Kumbh Mela was organized here last year to restore the cultural heritage of Tribeni and revive the glory of Kumbh tradition. Seven centuries later, the three-day Kumbh Mahasnan and the fair have infused a new energy into the region. A large number of people participated in the Ganga Aarti, Rudrabhishek and Yajna that took place every day for three days. Various ashrams, mutths and akhadas were also included in the festival this time. Various genres related to Bengali traditions such as Kirtan, Baul, Godiyo Nritto, Sree-Khol, Poter Gaan, Chou-Nach, became the center of attraction in the evening programmes. This is a very commendable effort to connect our youth with the golden past of the country. There are many other such practices in India, which need to be revived. I hope that the discussion about them will definitely inspire people in this direction.
My dear countrymen, Swachh Bharat Abhiyan has changed the meaning of public participation in our country. If something related to cleanliness takes place anywhere in the country people certainly inform me about it. That’s how my attention was drawn to a cleanliness campaign by the youth of Haryana. There is a village in Haryana – Dulhedi. The youth here decided that Bhiwani city has to be made exemplary in terms of cleanliness. He formed an organization called Yuva Swachhta Evam Janseva Samiti. The youth associated with this committee reach Bhiwani at 4 in the morning. Together they run cleanliness drives at different places in the city. These people have so far cleared tons of garbage from different areas of the city.
Friends, ‘Waste to Wealth’ is also an important dimension of the Swachh Bharat Abhiyan. Kamala Moharana, a sister from Kendrapada district of Odisha, runs a self-help group. The women of this group make many things like baskets and mobile stands from milk pouches and other plastic packing materials. This is becoming a good source of income for them along with ensuring cleanliness. If we resolve, we can make a huge contribution towards a clean India. At least we all should take a pledge to replace plastic bags with cloth bags. You will see, how much satisfaction your resolution will give you, and also inspire other people.
My dear countrymen, today you and I joined together and once again talked about many inspirational topics. We listened to everything sitting with family and will now hum it throughout the day. The more we talk about the industriousness of the country, the more energy we derive. Moving with this very energy flow, today we have reached the milepost of the 98th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Holi festival is just a few days from today. Happy Holi to all of you. We have to celebrate our festival with the resolve of ‘Vocal for Local’. Don’t forget to share your experiences with me too. Till then, I take leave of you. Next time we will meet again with new topics. Thank you very much, Namaskar!
My dear Countrymen, once again a very warm welcome to all of you in Mann Ki Baat. As we commence this discussion today, many thoughts are arising in the mind and the heart. This mutual connection through Mann Ki Baat has reached its ninety-ninth (99th) distinction. Generally, we get to hear that the turn around the ninety-ninth (99th) is very difficult. In Cricket, “Nervous Nineties” is considered a very difficult stage. But, where there is Mann Ki Baat of the people of India, the inspiration therein is something else altogether! I’m also happy that there is a lot of enthusiasm among the people of the country regarding the hundredth (100th) episode of Mann Ki Baat. I am receiving a lot of messages; even phone calls. Today, when we are celebrating the Azadi ka Amrit Kaal; moving forward with new resolutions, I’m also very eager to know your suggestions and thoughts regarding the hundredth (100th) episode of Mann Ki Baat. I am eagerly waiting for such suggestions of yours. Although, one always has to wait…this time the wait is just longer. Your suggestions and ideas will make the hundredth (100th) Mann Ki Baat on the 30th of April extremely memorable.
My dear countrymen, in Mann Ki Baat, we have mentioned thousands of people who dedicate their lives in the service of others. There are many people who spend their entire pension towards the education of daughters…some dedicate their whole life’s earnings for the environment and the living beings. In our country, selfless charity, Parmarth has been placed so high that people do not hesitate to donate their all for the happiness of others. That’s why since childhood we are narrated the sagas of Shivi and Dadhichi, who sacrificed their mortal selves.
Friends, in this era of modern medical science, organ donation has become a very important means of imparting life to someone. It is said that when a person donates one’s body after death, it creates a possibility for eight to nine people to get a new life. It is matter of satisfaction, that today awareness about Organ Donation is also rising in the country, In the year 2013, there were less than five thousand cases of organ donation in our country; but in 2022, this number has increased to more than fifteen thousand. People who have done organ donation, their families, have actually accomplished a lot of Punya!
Friends, I cherished a desire for a long time to know the Mann Ki Baat of people who do such noble deeds and share it with the countrymen as well. So today in Mann Ki Baat a lovely daughter, a father of a beautiful angel and her mother are going to join us. The father’s name is Sukhbir Singh Sandhu ji and the mother’s name is Supreet Kaur ji…this family resides in Amritsar, Punjab. After many a prayer, they were blessed with a very beautiful girl child…a doll like daughter. The people of the household lovingly named her Ababat Kaur. The connotation of Ababat is related to the service of others…it is related to ameliorating the sufferings of others. When she was only thirty nine days old, she left this world. But Sukhbir Singh Sandhu ji and his wife Supreet Kaur ji, their family took a very inspiring decision. And the decision was…Organ Donation of a daughter who was thirty nine days only. Sukhbir Singh and his wife are present with us on the phone line at this moment. Come, let’s talk to them.
Prime Minister – Sukhbir ji Namaste.
Sukhbir ji – Namaste Honorable Prime Minister. Sat Shri Akal
Prime Minister – Sat Shri Akal ji, Sat Shri Akal ji, Sukhbir ji, as I was thinking about ‘Mann Ki Baat’ today, I felt that since the matter pertaining to Ababat is so inspiring, I should listen to it straight from you, because when a daughter is born in the household, it brings along many dreams and a lot of joy… but I can also imagine how severe the pain would be if the daughter departs so soon. The way you have taken the decision, I want to know about it in its entirety.
Sukhbir ji – Sir God had given us a very beautiful child, a very lovely doll had arrived into our house. As soon as she was born, we came to know that she has a bunch of nerves in her brain due to which the size of her heart was getting bigger. So we were taken aback that the child was healthy…so beautiful and yet born with such a big problem! So, for the first 24 days the child was completely normal. Suddenly her heart stopped working completely, so we quickly took her to the hospital, where the doctors revived her, but it took time to understand what was wrong with her… such a big problem; a small child and a sudden heart attack. So we took her to PGI Chandigarh for treatment. There the child fought bravely during the treatment. But the disease was such that its treatment was not possible at such a tender age. The doctors tried a lot to revive her, if the child were to approach the six month mark, then one could have thought of operating on her. But God had something else in mind, when she was only 39 days old, the doctor said that she had suffered a heart attack again, now there was very little hope left. So we both husband and wife weepingly came to the decision that we had seen her fighting bravely again and again as if she would go away now but then she was reviving, so we felt that this child had some purpose in coming here. So when they expressed utter helplessness, both of us decided… why not donate the organs of this child. Maybe there would be light in someone else’s life! Then we contacted the administrative block of PGI and they guided us that only kidneys of such a small child can be taken. The almighty gave us the courage, it is the philosophy of Guru Nanak Saheb that guided us in this decision.
Prime Minister – In life,You have truly abided by the teachings given by the Gurus. Are you there Supreet ji? Can we talk to her?
Sukhbir ji – Yes sir.
Supreet ji- Hello.
Prime Minister – Supreet ji I offer my Pranam to you.
Supreet ji- Namaskar sir Namaskar sir, it is a matter of great pride for us that you are talking to us.
Prime Minister – You have done such a great deed and I believe that when the country will get to know of all this, many people will come forward to save someone’s life. This contribution of Ababat, indeed is very big.
Supreet ji- Sir, this too was probably a Bakshish from Guru Nanak Badshah ji that gave us the courage to take such a decision.
Prime Minister – Nothing can happen without the blessings of the Gurus.
Supreet ji – absolutely sir absolutely.
Prime Minister- Sukhbir ji, when you were in the hospital and when the doctor gave you this shocking news, even after that you and your wife took such a big decision with a calm and composed mind, it is the teachings of the Gurus that led to such an altruistic thought in the mind and in fact the meaning of Ababat in common parlance is helpful. I want to hear of the moment that this work was done.
Sukhbir ji- Sir, actually Priya ji, a family friend of ours had donated her organs and we got inspiration from her too…so at that time we felt that the body which is there would merge into the five elements. When someone gets separated forever and goes away, his body is burnt or buried, but if his organs are useful to someone, then it is a good deed and we felt more proud at that time when the doctors told us that your daughter had become the youngest donor in India whose organs had been successfully transplanted. So our heads were held high with pride that whereas we could not bring glory to our parents till this age, a small child had come and raised our name in so many days…and the bigger thing that today I am talking to you about this topic. We are feeling proud.
Prime Minister – Sukhbir ji, it is not as if only one part of your daughter is alive today. Your daughter has become an immortal traveler of the immortal saga of humanity. She is present even today through a part of her body. For this noble deed, I appreciate you, your wife, your family.
Sukhbir ji – Thank you sir
Friends, the greatest feeling behind organ donation is that someone’s life should be saved even while leaving. People who wait for organ donation know how difficult it is to pass each moment of waiting. And in such a situation, when an organ donor or a cadaver donor is found, then virtually, a form of the Almighty is seen in him. Snehlata Chaudhary, a resident of Jharkhand, was also like that who gave life to others as the Almighty would! Snehlata Chowdhary, 63, donated her heart, kidney and liver. Today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, her son Abhijit Chowdhary is with us. Let’s hear from him.
Prime Minister – Abhijeet ji, Namaskar.
Abhijeet ji- Pranam sir.
Prime Minister- Abhijeet ji, you are the son of such a mother who gave you life in a way by giving birth to you, but even after her death, your mother gave life to many people. You Abhijeet must certainly be feeling proud as a son.
Abhijeet ji – Yes sir.
Prime Minister- Tell us a little bit about your mother, under what circumstances the decision of organ donation was taken?
Abhijeet ji – There is a small village in Jharkhand called Seraikela, where both my parents live. They used to go on a morning walk continuously for the last twenty-five years.According to her routine, she left for her morning walk at 4 in the morning. At that time a motorcyclist hit her from behind and she fell instantly due to which she suffered severe head injury. Immediately we took her to Sadar Hospital, Seraikela, where the doctor bandaged her, but she was bleeding profusely. And she had no consciousness. Immediately we took her to Tata main hospital. She underwent surgery there, after 48 hours of observation, the doctor said that there are very few chances from there on. Then we airlifted her and brought her to AIIMS Delhi. She was under treatment here for about 7-8 days. After that the observation was fine, but suddenly her blood pressure dropped a lot, after that, we came to know that she had suffered brain death. Then the doctor briefed us with the protocol about organ donation. We could not tell our father that there is something like organ donation because we felt that he would not be able to absorb that, so, We wanted to remove from his mind that something like that was going on. As soon as we told him that the matter of organ donation was going on. Then he said that no – no, this was the mother’s wish and we had to do this. We were very disappointed till the time we came to know that mummy will not be able to survive, but as soon as this organ donation discussion started, that disappointment turned to a very positive side and we entered a very positive environment. While doing that, we had counselling at 8 o’clock in the night. On the second day we did organ donation. Mummy had lofty thoughts in this matter… earlier she used to be very active in social activities such as eye-donation. Perhaps we were able to do such a big thing with that very thought in mind, and because of my father’s decision making regarding this matter, this thing became possible.
Prime Minister – How many people benefitted through the organs?
Abhijeet ji – Her heart, two kidneys, liver and both eyes were donated, so four people got their lives back and two people their eyes.
Prime Minister- Abhijeet ji, both your father and mother are entitled to a respectful bow. I salute them…your father led your family members in such a big decision, it is really very inspiring. I believe that a mother is afterall a mother. A mother is also an inspiration by herself. But the traditions that the mother leaves behind become a great strength from generation to generation. The inspiration for organ donation is reaching the whole country today through your mother. I congratulate your whole family for this sacred and great work. Thank you Abhijeet ji, and do convey our regards to your father.
Abhijeet ji – definitely, thank you
Friends, whether it is 39-day-old Ababat Kaur or 63-year-old Snehlata Chowdhary, great donors like them make us understand the importance of life. In our country today there are a large number of needy people who are waiting for an organ donor in the hope of a healthy life. It is a matter of utmost satisfaction for me that in order to make organ donation easy and to encourage it, work is being done on a uniform policy in the whole country. In this direction, it has also been decided to remove the condition of domicile of the states, that is, now the patient will be able to go to any state of the country and register for receiving the organs. The government has also decided to abolish the age limit of below 65 years for organ donation. In the midst of these efforts, I urge the countrymen that organ donors should come forward in maximum numbers. One decision of yours can save the lives of many people, can give life.
My dear countrymen, this is the time of Navratri; the time to worship Shakti. Today, the potential of India which is emerging from a new perspective, our woman power has a very big role in it. Recently, many such examples have emerged before us. You must have seen Asia’s first female loco pilot Surekha Yadav on social media. Surekha ji, setting another record, has also become the first woman loco pilot of Vande Bharat Express as well. This month, producer Guneet Monga and director Kartiki Gonsalves brought laurels to the country by winning an Oscar for their documentary, ‘The Elephant Whisperers’. Sister Jyotirmayi Mohanty, Scientist of Bhabha Atomic Research Center has also notched another achievement for the country. Jyotirmoyee has received a special award from IUPAC in the field of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. Earlier this year, India’s Under-19 women’s cricket team created history by winning the T-20 World Cup. If you look at politics, a new beginning has taken place in Nagaland. In Nagaland, for the first time in 75 years, two women legislators have reached the Vidhan Sabha through their victory. One of them has also been made a minister in the Government of Nagaland, that is, for the first time the people of the state have also got a woman minister.
Friends, A few days ago, I also met those brave daughters who went to help the people of Turkey after the devastating earthquake. All these were part of the NDRF contingent.
Their courage and skills are being praised all over the world. India has also deployed a Women-only Platoon in the Peacekeeping Force under the UN Mission.
Today, the daughters of the country are raising the flag of their bravery in all the three armed forces. Group Captain Shalija Dhami has become the first woman Air Force officer to get a Command Appointment in a Combat Unit. She has a flying experience of about 3000 hours. Similarly, brave heart Captain Shiva Chauhan of the Indian Army has become the first woman officer to be posted at Siachen. Shiva will be stationed for three months in Siachen where the temperature drops to minus sixty (-60) degrees.
Friends, this list is so long that it is difficult to discuss all of them here. All such women, our daughters, are today giving energy to India and India’s dreams. This energy of women power is the oxygen of a developed India.
My dear countrymen, these days there is a lot of talk about clean energy, renewable energy all over the world. When I meet the people across the world, they certainly talk about India’s phenomenal success in this field. Especially, the speed with which India is moving forward in the field of solar energy is a big achievement in itself. The people of India have had a special relationship with the Sun for centuries. The scientific understanding we have about the power of the Sun, the traditions of worshiping the Sun, are rarely seen at other places. I am happy that today every countryperson understands the importance of solar energy and also wants to contribute towards clean energy. This spirit of ‘Sabka Prayas’ is taking India’s Solar Mission forward today. In Pune, Maharashtra, one such excellent effort has caught my attention. Here the people of MSR-Olive Housing Society have decided that they would now run things of common utility like drinking water, lift and lights in the society with solar energy only. After this everyone together in this society got solar panels installed. Today about 90 thousand kilowatt hour electricity is being generated from these solar panels every year. This is resulting in saving of about 40, 000 rupees every month. All the people of the Society are getting the benefit of this savings.
Friends, Like Pune, the people of Diu in Daman-Diu, which is a separate district, have also done a wonderful job. You must know that Diu is near Somnath. Diu has become the first district in India, which is using 100% clean energy for all day time needs. The mantra of this success of Diu is also Sabka Prayas. Once upon a time resources for power generation were a challenge. People chose solar energy as a solution to this challenge. Here solar panels were installed on barren land and many buildings. Through these panels, more electricity is being generated in Diu than what is required during the day time. Through this solar project, about 52 crore rupees have also been saved on the purchase of electricity. Due to this, the environment has also been saved a lot.
Friends, what they have done in Pune and Diu, such efforts are being made in many other places across the country. This shows how sensitive we Indians are about the environment and nature, and how our country is very alert for the future generations. I heartily appreciate all such efforts.
My dear countrymen, in our country, with the passage of time, according to the situation and circumstances, many traditions develop. These traditions increase the strength of our culture and also give it new vitality daily. A few months ago, one such tradition started in Kashi. During the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam, the centuries-old historical and cultural ties between Kashi and the Tamil region were celebrated. The spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’ gives strength to our country. When we know and learn about each other, this feeling of oneness strengthens. With this spirit of unity, ‘Saurashtra-Tamil Sangamam’ will be held in different parts of Gujarat next month. The ‘Saurashtra-Tamil Sangamam’ will run from April 17 to 30. Some listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ must be wondering, what the relation of Saurashtra in Gujarat with Tamil Nadu is? Let me tell you, centuries ago many people from Saurashtra had settled in different parts of Tamil Nadu. These people are still known as ‘Saurashtri Tamil’. Even today, some glimpses of Saurashtra can be found in their food habits, lifestyle and social rituals. Many people from Tamil Nadu have written appreciative letters to me regarding this event. Jayachandran ji, who lives in Madurai, has written something very poignant. He said that – “After a thousand years, for the first time someone has thought about the Saurashtra-Tamil relations, and brought to the fore the people who settled in Tamil Nadu from Saurashtra.” Jayachandran’s words are the expression of thousands of Tamil brothers and sisters.
Friends, I would like to inform the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ about a piece of news related to Assam. This too strengthens the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’. You all know that we are celebrating the 400th birth anniversary of Veer Lachit Borphukan ji. The brave Lachit Borphukan had liberated Guwahati from the clutches of the tyrannical Mughal Sultanate. Today, the country is getting acquainted with the indomitable courage of this great warrior. A few days ago, a campaign for essay writing based on the life of Lachit Borphukan was launched. You will be surprised to know that about 45 lakh people sent essays for this. You will also be happy to know that now it has become a Guinness Record. And the biggest thing and a matter of great happiness is that these essays that have been written and sent by the people on Veer Lachit Borphukan have been written in about 23 different languages. Among them, apart from the Assamese language, people have sent essays in languages like Hindi, English, Bangla, Bodo, Nepali, Sanskrit, and Santhali. I express my heartfelt appreciation to everyone who has been a part of this effort.
My dear countrymen, when it comes to Kashmir or Srinagar, the first picture that comes to our mind is of her valleys and Dal Lake. All of us would like to enjoy the views of Dal Lake…However, there is one more thing special about Dal Lake. Dal Lake is also known for its delicious Lotus Stems, also known as ‘Kamal Kakdi’. Lotus stems are known by different names in different places across the country. In Kashmir, they are called Nadru. The demand for Nadru of Kashmir is continuously increasing. In light of this demand, farmers cultivating Nadru in Dal Lake have formed an FPO. About 250 farmers have joined this FPO. Today these farmers have started exporting their Nadru to foreign countries. Just some time back, these farmers sent two consignments to UAE. This success is not only bringing a name to Kashmir but also it has increased the income of hundreds of farmers.
Friends, another such effort of the people of Kashmir related to agriculture is diffusing the fragrance of its success these days. You must be wondering why I am talking about the fragrance of success – Well…it is a matter of fragrance and it is a matter of aroma! There is a town ‘Bhadarwah’ in the Doda district of Jammu and Kashmir. Here, the farmers had been engaged in traditional maize cultivation for decades, but some farmers thought of doing something different. They turned to floriculture, that is, the cultivation of flowers. Today, around two and a half thousand farmers are cultivating lavender here. They have also been handheld through the Aroma Mission of the Central Government. This new cultivation has greatly increased the income of the farmers, and today, along with the lavender, the fragrance of their success is spreading far and wide.
Friends, when there is talk of Kashmir, talk of lotus, talk of flowers, talk of fragrance, then it is very natural to remember Maa Sharda who is seated on the lotus flower. A few days ago, the Grand Temple of Maa Sharda was inaugurated in Kupwara. This temple is built on the same route one would use to go to visit Sharda Peeth. The local people have helped a lot in the construction of this Temple. I congratulate the people of Jammu and Kashmir for this auspicious work.
My dear countrymen, that’s all for this edition of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I will meet you next time in the hundredth episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I urge you all to send your suggestions. In this month of March, from Holi to Navratri, we have been busy with many festivals. The holy month of Ramzan has also started. The auspicious festival of Shri Ram Navami is also going to be celebrated in the next few days. After this… Mahavir Jayanti, Good Friday and Easter will also be observed. In the month of April, we also celebrate the birth anniversaries of two great personalities of India. These are two great men – Mahatma Jyotiba Phule, and Babasaheb Ambedkar. Both these great men made unprecedented contributions to eradicate discrimination from society. Today, in ‘Azadi ka AmritKaal’, we need to learn from such great personalities and take constant inspiration from them. We have to keep our duties at the forefront. Friends, at this time, cases of Corona are also rising in some places. That’s why, all of you must take precautions and be mindful of cleanliness. We will meet again next month in the 100th episode of Mann Ki Baat. Till then, I take leave of you.
Thank you, Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Today is the hundredth episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I have received thousands of letters from all of you, lakhs of messages … and I have tried to read as many letters as possible, have a look at them and try to understand the messages a bit. Many a time while reading your letters, I got emotional, was filled with emotions, got carried away in emotions and then also composed myself. You have congratulated me on the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, but I say this from the core of my heart,…that in fact, all of you, the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, our countrymen, deserve congratulations. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ of crores of Indians, it is the expression of their feelings.
Friends, the 3rd of October, 2014 was the festival of Vijaya Dashami and all of us together started the journey of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ on the day of Vijaya Dashami. Vijaya Dashami is the festival of victory of good over evil. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has also become a unique festival of goodness and positivity of the countrymen. A festival that comes every month, keenly awaited by all of us. We celebrate positivity in this. We also celebrate people’s participation in this. Sometimes it is hard to believe that so many months, so many years have passed since ‘Mann Ki Baat’ commenced. Every episode was special in itself. Every time, the novelty of new examples, every time the extension of new successes of the countrymen. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, people from every corner of the country, people of all age groups joined. Whether it is about Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, or the Swachh Bharat movement, love for Khadi or nature, whether it is the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav or Amrit Sarovar, any subject with which ‘Mann Ki Baat’ got associated, turned into a mass movement, and you people have made it so. When I jointly shared ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with the then US President Barack Obama, it was discussed all over the world.
Friends, for me, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has been like worshipping the qualities in others. I had a guide – Shri Laxmanrao ji Inamdar. We used to address him as Vakeel Saheb. He always used to say that we should worship the qualities of others. No matter who is face to face with you, be it your compatriot, be it your opponent, we should try to know about their good qualities and learn from them. This trait of his has always inspired me. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has become a great medium to learn from the qualities of others.
My dear countrymen, this program has never let me be away from you. I remember, when I was the Chief Minister of Gujarat, it was natural to meet and interact with the common people there. The work and tenure of the Chief Minister is like that…, there are many opportunities to come together. But after coming to Delhi in 2014, I found that life here was very different. The nature of the work is different, the responsibility is different, one is bound by circumstances, the rigours of security & time limits. In the initial days, something felt different, there was an emptiness. Fifty years ago, I did not leave my home just to find one day it would be difficult to contact the people of my own country. The very countrymen who are my everything,… I could not live separated from them. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ gave me a solution to this challenge, a way to connect with the common man. The post and protocol remained limited to the system and public sentiment, along with crores of people, became an inseparable part of my inner world. Every month I read thousands of messages from the people of the country, every month I get to view one or the other wonderful manifestation of the countrymen. I see and feel the extremities of the penance and sacrifice of the countrymen. I just don’t feel that I am even a little far from you. For me ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is not a program, for me it is a matter of faith, of worship, or Vrat. Like when people go to worship God, they bring along a Thaal of Prasad. For me, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is like a Thaal of Prasad at the feet of God in the form of Janata-Janardan, the people. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has become a spiritual journey of my being.
‘Mann Ki Baat’ is a journey from the self to the collective.
‘Mann Ki Baat’ is a journey from myself to ourselves.
It is not me, but you are its Sanskar Sadhana.
Imagine, some of our countrymen have been planting trees on deserted hills and barren land for 40 odd years, many people have been digging stepwells and ponds for water conservation for 30 odd years, cleaning them as well. Some have been teaching underprivileged children for 25-30 years, some are helping in the treatment of the poor. I have become emotional while mentioning them many a time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Friends from AIR had to re-record it many times. Today, a lot from the past is coming in front of my eyes. These efforts of the countrymen have inspired me to continuously keep striving.
Friends, the people who we mention in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ are all our Heroes who have made this program come alive. Today, when we have reached the milestone of the 100th episode, I also wish that we once again go to all these Heroes to know about their journey. Today, we will also try to talk to some colleagues. Brother Sunil Jaglan of Haryana is joining me. Sunil Jaglan ji has had such an impact on my mind because there used to be a lot of discussion on Gender Ratio in Haryana and I also started the campaign of ‘Beti Bachao-Beti Padhao’ from Haryana itself. And meanwhile, when I came across Sunil ji’s ‘Selfie With Daughter’ campaign, I felt very happy. I also learned from him and included it in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. In no time ‘Selfie With Daughter’ turned into a Global Campaign. And the issue in this was neither selfie, nor technology,… importance was accorded to the daughter. The importance of a daughter in life also comes to the fore through this campaign. The result of many such efforts is that today the Gender Ratio has improved in Haryana. Let’s chat with Sunil ji today.
Mr. Prime Minister – Namaskar Sunil ji,
Sunil- Namaskar sir, my joy has risen a lot after hearing your voice sir.
Prime Minister- Sunil ji everyone remembers ‘Selfie with daughter’… Now when it is being discussed once again, how do you feel?
Sunil – Prime Minister, in fact, the fourth battle of Panipat that you started from our state Haryana to bring smiles on the faces of the daughters, which the whole country has tried to win under your leadership, is really important for me, for every daughter’s father and those who love daughters.
Prime Minister- Sunil ji, how is your daughter now, what is she doing these days?
Sunil- Yes, my daughters are Nandani and Yachika, one is studying in class 7, one is studying in class 4 and they are big fans of yours. Actually they and their classmates have written letters to you saying Thank you Prime Minister.
Prime Minister – That’s great! Give lots of blessings to the daughters on my behalf and that of listeners of Mann Ki Baat.
Sunil- Thank you very much. Because of you, smiles on the faces of the daughters of the country are continuously on the rise.
Prime Minister – Thank you very much Sunil ji.
Sunil – Ji. Thank you.
It’s a matter of fulfilment for me that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have mentioned hundreds of inspiring stories of woman power of the country. Be it our army or the sports world, whenever I have talked about the achievements of women, it has been praised a lot. Like we discussed about the women of Deur village of Chhattisgarh. These women, through self-help groups, run campaigns to clean village squares, roads and temples. Similarly, the country also took a lot of inspiration from the tribal women of Tamil Nadu, who exported thousands of Eco-Friendly Terracotta Cups. In Tamil Nadu itself, 20 thousand women came together to revive the Nag river in Vellore. Many such campaigns have been led by our woman power and ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has served as a platform to bring their efforts to the fore.
Friends, we now have one more gentleman on the phone line. His name is Manzoor Ahmed. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Manzoor Ahmed ji was referred to while talking about Pencil Slates of Jammu and Kashmir.
Prime Minister – Manzoor ji, how are you?
Manzoor ji – Thank you sir… doing very well sir.
Prime Minister- It is a great pleasure to talk to you in this 100th episode of Mann Ki Baat.
Manzoor ji – Thank you sir.
Prime Minister- Well, how is the pencil-slates work going on?
Manzoor ji – It is going very well sir. Ever since you mentioned our Man Ki Baat in Mann ki Baat programme, sir, work has increased a lot since then sir and employment for others has also increased a lot in this work.
Prime Minister- How many people would be getting employment now?
Manzoor ji – Now I have 200 plus…
Prime Minister – Great! I am very happy.
Manzoor ji – Ji sir..ji sir…now I am expanding it in a couple of months and employment for 200 people will increase sir.
Prime Minister – Well great! See Manzoor ji…
Manjoor ji – Yes sir…
Prime Minister- I remember very well and on that day you told me that this is such a work which has no identity, there is no self-recognition, and you underwent a lot of distress and because of this you had to face a lot of difficulties. But now there is recognition and you are giving employment to more than 200 people.
Manjoor ji – Yes sir…
Prime Minister- And you have given us delightful news of carrying out new expansions and giving employment to further 200 people.
Manzoor ji- Even sir, the farmers who are here, sir, also got a lot of benefit from this, sir. Used to sell a tree for 2000, now the same tree has reached 5000 sir. Demand has increased a lot in this since then… and it has also gained its own identity. Sir, I have many orders for this, now I am going to expand further in one or two months and cover two to four villages, taking 200 to 250 boys and girls who can be adjusted in this and they can carry on with their livelihood sir.
Prime Minister- See Manzoor ji, how tremendous the power of Vocal for Local is.., you have manifested it on the ground.
Manjoor ji – Yes sir.
Prime Minister- Many many good wishes to you and all the farmers of the village and also to all the colleagues working with you, thank you brother.
Manzoor ji – Thank you sir.
Friends, there are so many talented people in our country who have reached the pinnacle of success through their hard work. I remember, Venkat Murali Prasad ji of Visakhapatnam did an Atmanirbhar Bharat Chart Share. He had told us how he would make maximum use of Indian products only. When Pramod ji of Bettiah set up a small unit to make LED bulbs or Santosh ji of Garhmukteshwar started making mats, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ became the medium to bring their products in front of everyone. We have discussed many examples from Make in India to Space Start-ups in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Friends, you may remember that a few episodes ago I had also mentioned about Manipur’s sister Vijayashanti Devi. Vijayashanti ji makes clothes from lotus fibers. This unique eco-friendly idea of her was discussed in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and her work became more popular. Today Vijayashanti ji is with us on the phone.
Prime Minister :- Namaste Vijayashanti ji! How are you?
Vijayashanti ji :- Sir, I am fine.
Prime Minister :- and how’s your work going on?
Vijayashanti ji :- sir, still working along with my 30 women
Prime Minister :- in such a short period you have reached 30 persons team!
Vijayashanti ji :- Yes sir, this year also more expand with 100 women in my area
Prime Minister :- So your target is 100 women
Vijayashanti ji :- Yaa! 100 women
Prime Minister :- and now people are familiar with this lotus stem fiber
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, everyone’s know from ‘Mann Ki Baat’ Program all over India.
Prime Minister :- so now its very popular
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, from Prime Minister ‘Mann ki Baat’ program everyone knows about lotus fiber
Prime Minister :- So now you got the market also?
Vijayashanti ji :- Yes, I have got a market from USA also they want to buy in bulk in lots quantities, but I want to give from this year to send the U.S also.
Prime Minister :- So, now you are an exporter?
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, from this year I export our product made in India Lotus fiber
Prime Minister :- so, when I say Vocal for Local and now Local for Global
Vijayashanti ji :- yes sir, I want to reach my product all over the globe of all world
Prime Minister :- so congratulations and wish you best luck
Vijayashanti ji :- Thank you sir
Prime Minister :- Thank you, Thank you Vijayashanti
Vijayashanti ji :- Thank you sir
Friends, there has been another specialty of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, many mass movements have come into being and gained momentum. For example, the very mission to re-establish our toys and our toy industry started with ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The beginning of raising awareness about Indian breed dogs, our native dogs, was also started with ‘Mann Ki Baat’ only. We had started another campaign that we will not bargain with the poor small scale shopkeepers,… we will not haggle with them. Even when the ‘Har Ghar Tiranga’ campaign started, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ played a big role in connecting the countrymen with this resolve. Every such example has become an agent of change in the society. Pradeep Sangwan ji too has taken up such a task to inspire the society. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we discussed Pradeep Sangwan ji’s ‘Healing Himalayas’ campaign. He is with us on the phone line.
Modi ji – Pradeep ji Namaskar!
Pradeep ji – Sir Jai Hind!
Modi ji – Jai Hind, Jai Hind, brother! How are you?
Pradeep ji – Very nice sir. Even better on hearing your voice.
Modi ji – You thought of healing the Himalayas.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir.
Modi ji – Also launched a campaign. How is your campaign going on these days?
Pradeep ji – Sir it is going on very well. From 2020, imagine that the amount work we used to do in five years is now done in one year.
Modi ji – That’s great!
Pradeep ji – Yes, yes, sir. In the beginning, I was very nervous, I was very scared that whether I would be able to do this for the rest of my life or not, but got some support and till 2020, we were struggling a lot honestly. Not many people were joining …, there were many people who were not able to support. They were not even paying that much attention to our campaign. But after 2020, when it was mentioned in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, many things changed. Meaning, earlier we used to do 6-7 cleaning drives in a year, or 10 cleaning drives. Today, we collect five tons of garbage on a daily basis from different locations.
Modi ji – Wonderful!
Pradeep ji – After being mentioned in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, believe me Sir, that I was at the stage of almost giving up at that point of time and after that a lot of change came in my life and then speeded up so fast which was beyond our comprehension. So I’m really thankful how you find out people like us. Who works in such a remote area, we are working sitting in the Himalayan region. We are working at this altitude. You found us there. You brought our work in front of the world. So it was a very emotional moment for me even then and even today that I am able to talk to the Principal Servant of our country. Nothing can be more fortunate for me than this.
Modi ji – Pradeep ji! You are doing sadhna in true sense on the peaks of the Himalayas and I am sure now on hearing your name, people remember how you are involved in the cleanliness campaign of the mountains.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir.
Modi ji – And as you told us now a huge team is being formed and you are doing such a huge amount of work daily.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir.
Modi ji – And I have full faith that through your efforts and discussion about it, now many mountaineers have started posting photos related to cleanliness.
Pradeep ji – Yes sir! A lot.
Modi ji – It is good. Through the efforts of friends like you, waste is also a wealth is now becoming stable in the minds of the people, and the environment is also being protected now and the Himalayas which we are proud of, are being taken care of and conserved… the common man is also connecting. Pradeep ji I liked it very much. Thank you very much brother.
Pradeep ji – Thank you Sir Thank you so much Jai Hind
Friends, Today tourism is growing very fast in the country. Be it our natural resources, be it rivers, mountains, ponds or our pilgrimage sites, it is very important to keep them clean. This will help the tourism industry a lot. Along with cleanliness in tourism, we have also discussed the Incredible India movement often. Through this movement, for the first time, people came to know about such places, which were just in their neighbourhood. I always say that before going abroad for tourism, we must visit at least 15 tourist destinations of our country and these destinations should not be from the state where you reside…they must be from any other state outside your state. Similarly, we have continuously talked about serious topics like clean Siachen, single use plastic and e-waste. Today, this effort of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is very important in solving environmental issues about which the whole world is concerned.
Friends, this time I have received another special message from UNESCO DG Audrey Azoulay regarding ‘Mann Ki Baat’. She has given best wishes to all the countrymen for this wonderful journey of 100 episodes. Also, she has asked some questions too. Let us first listen to the Mann Ki Baat of the DG of UNESCO.
#Audio (UNESCO DG)#
DG UNESCO: Namaste Excellency, Dear Prime Minister on behalf of UNESCO I thank you for this opportunity to be part of the 100th episode of the ‘Mann Ki Baat’ Radio broadcast. UNESCO and India have a long common history. We have very strong partnerships together in all areas of our mandate – education, science, culture and information and I would like to take this opportunity today to talk about the importance of education. UNESCO is working with its member states to ensure that everyone in the world has access to quality education by 2030. With the largest population in the world, could you please explain Indian way to achieving this objective. UNESCO also works to support culture and protect heritage and India is chairing the G-20 this year. World leaders would be coming to Delhi for this event. Excellency, how does India want to put culture and education at the top of the international agenda? I once again thank you for this opportunity and convey my very best wishes through you to the people of India….see you soon. Thank you very much.
Thank you Excellency. I am happy to interact with you in the 100th ‘Mann Ki Baat’ programme. I am also happy that you have raised the important issues of education and culture.
Friends, The DG of UNESCO has wanted to know about India’s efforts regarding Education and Cultural Preservation. Both these topics have been favorite topics of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Whether it is about education or culture, whether it is about its preservation or promotion, this has been an ancient tradition of India. The work that the country is doing in this direction today is really commendable. Be it the National Education Policy or the option of studying in a regional language, or technology integration in education, you will notice many such efforts. Years ago, programs like ‘Gunotsav and Shala Praveshotsav’ had become a wonderful example of public participation in Gujarat to providing better education and reducing dropout rates. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we have highlighted the efforts of many such people, who are selflessly working for education. You may remember, once we discussed about Late D. Prakash Rao, a tea vendor in Odisha who was engaged in the mission of teaching poor children. Be it Sanjay Kashyap, who runs Digital Libraries in the villages of Jharkhand, Hemlata N.K., who helped many children through e-learning during Covid. Yes, we have referred to examples of many such teachers in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. We have also accorded regular place to the efforts of Cultural Preservation in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Be it Lakshdweep’s Kummel Brothers Challengers Club, or platforms such as Karnataka’s ‘Kwemshree’ ji’s ‘Kala Chetna’, people from every corner of the country have sent me such examples through letters. We had also talked about the three competitions which were related to songs, lullabies and ‘Rangoli’ on patriotism. You must remember, once we had discussed Indian forms of education through Story Telling with Story Tellers from across the country. I have an unwavering belief that the biggest change can be brought about by collective effort. This year, where we are moving forward in the Azadi Ka Amritkaal, we are also presiding over the G-20. This is also one of the reasons why our resolve to enrich Diverse Global Cultures along with education has become stronger.
My dear countrymen, a mantra from our Upanishads has been inspiring our collective thought for centuries.
Charaiveti Charaiveti Charaiveti |
Keep moving – keep moving – keep moving
Today we are completing the 100th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ with the same spirit of Charaiveti Charaiveti. In strengthening the social fabric of India, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is like the thread of a rosary, holding each bead together. In every episode, the spirit of service and capability of the countrymen have inspired others. In this program, every countryman becomes an inspiration to other countrymen. In a way, every episode of Mann Ki Baat prepares the ground for the next episode. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has always moved ahead with goodwill, the spirit of service-spirit and the sense of duty. This positivity will take the country forward in the Azadi Ka Amritkaal…, will take her to a new heights and I am happy that the beginning made by ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is becoming a new tradition in the country today. A tradition in which we see the spirit of everyone’s effort.
Friends, today I would also like to thank the personnel of All India Radio who record this entire program with great patience. I am also thankful to the translators, who translate ‘Mann Ki Baat’ into different regional languages really fast in a very short time. I also thank the personnel of Doordarshan and MyGov. I express my gratitude to all the TV channels, people from electronic media across the country, who show ‘Mann Ki Baat’ without commercial breaks and lastly, I would also like to express my gratitude to those who don the mantle of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ – the people of India, people who have faith in India. All this has been possible only because of your inspiration and strength.
Friends, by the way, I have so much to say today that both time and words are falling short. But I am sure that you all will understand my expressions, understand my feelings. As a member of your family, I have been in your midst with the help of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, will remain in your midst. We will meet again next month. We will again celebrate the successes of the countrymen with new topics and new information, till then I take leave of you. Take good care of yourself and your loved ones.
Thank you very much, Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
Once again, a very warm welcome to all of you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This time this episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is the beginning of its 2nd century. Last month all of us have celebrated the special century. Your participation is the greatest strength of this program. During  the broadcast of the 100th episode, in a way the whole country was bound by a single thread. Be it sanitation personnel brothers and sisters or veterans from myriad sectors, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has striven to bring everyone together. The intimacy and affection that all of you have shown for ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is unprecedented, it makes one emotional. When ‘Mann Ki Baat’ was broadcast, in different countries of the world, in various time zones, somewhere it was evening and somewhere it was late night… despite that, a large number of people took time out to listen to the 100
th
episode. I also saw that video from New Zealand, thousands of miles away, in which a 100 year old is expressing her motherly blessings. People from India and abroad have expressed their views on ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Many people have also offered Constructive Analysis. People have appreciated the fact that in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ only the achievements of the country and the countrymen are discussed. I once again thank you all with all due respects for this blessing.
My dear countrymen, we talked about the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam, Saurashtra-Tamil Sangamam in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Kashi-Telugu Sangamam was also held a while ago in Varanasi. Another such unique effort to give strength to the spirit of Ek Bharat, Shrestha Bharat has taken place in the country. This is the effort of  the Yuva Sangam. I thought, why not ask about this in detail from the very people who have been a part of this unique effort. That’s why two young people are connected with me on the phone right now – one is GyamarNyokum ji from Arunachal Pradesh and the other is daughter Vishakha Singh ji from Bihar. Let us first talk to GyamarNyokum.
Prime Minister: Gyamar ji, Namaste!
Gyamar ji: Namaste Modi ji!
Prime Minister: Fine Gyamar ji, first of all I would like toknow about you.
Gyamar ji – Modi ji, first of all,
I express my gratitude to you and the Government of India, that you gave me an opportunity and aretalking to meby taking out valuable time. I am studying in the first year of Mechanical Engineering at the National Institute of Technology, Arunachal Pradesh
Prime Minister: And what do your father and othersdo in the family?
Gyamar ji: Yes my father runs a small business and after thateveryone does some farming.
Prime Minister: How did you come to know about the Yuva Sangam?
Where did you go for the Yuva Sangam, how did you go, what happened?
Gyamar ji: Modi ji, Our institution NIT told us about the Yuva Sangam and that we couldparticipate in it. I again searched a little on the internet, and I came to know that this is a very good program, which could enable one to contribute a lot in the vision of Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat and I will get a chance to learn something new. I then right away, enrolled in it by going to the website. My experience was very enjoyable, very good.
Prime Minister: Did you have to make any selection?
Gyamar ji: Modi ji, When I opened the website, the people of Arunachal had two options… First was Andhra Pradesh which had IIT Tirupati and the second was Central University, Rajasthan so I put in my First preference as Rajasthan, Second Preference I did IIT Tirupati. I got selected for Rajasthan. Hence I went to Rajasthan.
Prime Minister: How was your Rajasthan visit? Did you go toRajasthan for the first time?
Gyamar ji: Yes, I had gone out of Arunachal for the first time.
I had seen all these forts of Rajasthan only in films and on the phone, so, when I went for the first time, my experience was very good, the people there were very good and the treatment given to us was very good. I got to learn many new things about the big lakes of Rajasthan and the people there, and rain water harvesting as well, which I did not know at all, so this Rajasthan visit was very good for me.
Prime Minister: See, the biggest advantage you have got is thatArunachal is also a land of brave hearts, Rajasthan is also a land of brave hearts and there are a large number of people from Rajasthan in the army, and whenever you meet people from Rajasthan among the soldiers on the border in Arunachal, you can definitely speak with them, that you had gone to Rajasthan,… had such an experience…after that your closeness with them will increase instantly. Well, you must have noticed some similarities there too, you would have thought that yes, it is the same in Arunachal too.
Gyamar ji: Modi ji, the one similarity I found was the love for the country and the vision and feeling of Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat, because in Arunachal too people feel very proud that they are Indians and similarly in Rajasthan also people are proud of their mother land. I noticed this a lot, and especially in the young generation, because I interacted with many youths there, so I saw a lot of similarity with what they want. And that is … whatever you want to do for India and love for your country….I saw a lot of similarity in both the states.
Prime Minister: So,did you increase your level of interaction with the friends that you made there …or forgot them after returning?
Gyamar ji: No, we extended our introduction.
Prime Minister: Yes…! So are you active on Social Media?
Gyamar ji: Yes Modi ji, I am active.
Prime Minister: Then you should write a blogon your experiences in the Yuva Sangam, how you enrolled in it, how your experience in Rajasthan has been, so that the youth of the country know the signigficance and greatness of Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat, what this schemeis all about… how youths can take advantage of it, you should write a blog full of your experiences… then it will be useful for many people to read.
Gyamar ji: Yes, I certainly will do.
Prime Minister: Gyamar ji, it was a pleasure talking to you.
And all of you youth should strive for the country’s bright future, because these 25 years are very important – for your life as well as for the life of the country, I extend my best wishes to you. Thank you.
Gyamar ji: Thank you Modi ji to you too.
Prime Minister: Namaskar brother!
Friends, the people of Arunachal are so full of warmth that I enjoy talking to them. Gyamarji’s experience at the Yuva Sangam was excellent. Come, let’s now speak to daughter from Bihar,Vishakha Singh ji.
Prime Minister: Vishakha ji, Namaskar.
Vishakha ji: First of all, my Pranam to Honorable Prime Minister of India and along with it, many salutations to you on behalf of all the delegates.
Prime Minister: WellVishakha ji, first tell us about yourself. Then I also want to know about the Yuva Sangam.
Vishakha ji: I am a resident of Sasaram city of Bihar and I came to know about Yuva Sangam first through a message of my college WhatsApp group. So, after that I found out more details about it…exactly what it is! So I came to know that this is a coming together of the youth through Prime Minister’s scheme ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’. So after that I applied and when I applied, I was excited to join it, but after traveling from there to Tamil Nadu, and back ….with the exposure that I gained, I now feel very proud that I have been a part of this program, so I am very happy to have participated in that program and I express my gratitude to you from the core of my heart that you have made such a wonderful program for youths like us so that we can adapt to the culture of different regions of India.
Prime Minister: Vishakha ji, what do you study?
Vishakha ji: I am a second year student of Computer Science Engineering.
Prime Minister: Ok Vishakha ji, how did you decide on the choice of the State you would go to and get connected with?
Vishakha ji: When I started searching about this Yuva Sangam on Google, I came to know that delegates from Bihar were being exchanged with delegates from Tamil Nadu. Tamil Nadu is a very rich cultural state of our country, so even at that time when I came to know and saw that people from Bihar were being sent to Tamil Nadu, it also helped me a lot in taking the decision that I should fill the form and whether to go there or not. I really feel very proud today that I took part in it and I am very happy.
Prime Minister: Was it your first visit to Tamil Nadu?
Vishakha ji: Ji…I’d gone  for the first time.
Prime Minister: Well, if you want to say something specially memorable, what would you say? The youth of the country are listening to you.
Vishakha ji: Yes, if we consider the whole journey, it has been wonderful for me. We have learnt very good things at each stage. I have made good friends in Tamil Nadu… have adapted to the culture there. I met people there. But the best thing that struck me there, was that firstly no one gets a chance to go to ISRO and we being delegates, got this opportunity to go to ISRO. Plus the second best thing was when we went to Raj Bhavan and met the Governor of Tamil Nadu. So those two moments were very good for me and I feel that in the age in which we are as a youth, we do not get the opportunity that we got through the Yuva Sangam. So it was perfect and most memorable moment for me.
Prime Minister: In Bihar food habits are different from the way they are in Tamilnadu!
Visakha ji: Yes.
Prime Minister: So it got set completely?
Vishakha ji: South Indian cuisine is prevalent in Tamilnadu. So as soon as we went there we were served Dosa, Idli, Sambhar, Uttapam, Vada, Upma. So first when we tried it was too good. The food there is very healthy, in fact it is very delicious and it is very different from the food of our north, so I liked the food there and the people there were also very nice.
Prime Minister: So now you must have made friends in Tamil Nadu too?
Vishakha ji: Yes! Yes there we stayed at NIT Trichy, after that at IIT Madras. I have become friends with the students at both those places.Plus there was a CII Welcome Ceremony meanwhile, so many students from nearby colleges also came there. So there we interacted with those students as well and I felt very happy to meet them, many of them are my friends too. And I also met some delegates who were coming to Bihar from Tamil Nadu, so we had a conversation with them as well and we still talk to each other, so I feel very happy.
Prime Minister: So Vishakha ji, do write a blog and share this experience on social media, firstly, of this Yuva Sangam, then of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshth Bharat’ and then the warmth you felt in Tamil Nadu,  and the welcome and hospitality that you received. You were showered with the the love of Tamil people, tell all these things to the country. so will you write?
Vishakha ji: Yes, of course!
Prime Minister: So I wish you all the best and thank you very much.
Visakha ji: Ji thank you so much. Namaskar
My best wishes to you Gyamar and Vishakha. May what you have learntat the Yuva Sangam stay with you for the rest of your life. This is my best wish for all of you.
Friends, India’s strength lies in its diversity. There is a lot to see in our country. Keeping this in view, the Ministry of Education has taken an excellent initiative named ‘Yuvasangam’. The objective of this initiative is to increase People to People Connect as well as to give an opportunity to the youth of the country to mingle with each other. Higher educational institutions of various states have been linked to it.
In ‘Yuvasangam’ youth visit cities and villages of other states, they get an opportunity to meet different types of people. In the first round of Yuvasangam, about 1200 youths have toured 22 states of the country. All the youth who have been a part of it, are returning with such memories, which will remain etched in their hearts for the rest of their lives. We have seen that CEOs, Business leaders of many big companies have spent time in India as Back-Packers. When I meet leaders of other countries, many a time they also tell me that they had gone to visit India in their youth. There is so much to know and see in our India that your curiosity will only increase every time. I hope that after coming to know of these exciting experiences, you too will definitely be inspired to travel to different parts of the country.
My dear countrymen, just a few days ago I was in Hiroshima, Japan.
There I got an opportunity to visit the Hiroshima Peace Memorial museum. It was an emotional experience. When we cherish the memories of history, it helps the coming generations a lot. Sometimes we get new lessons in museums… sometimes we get to learn a lot. A few days ago the International Museum Expo was also organized in India. It depicted the specialities of more than 1200 museums of the world. We have many different types of museums in India, which display many aspects related to our past, like, Gurugram has a unique museum – Museo Camera. It houses a collection of more than 8 thousand cameras belonging to the era after 1860. Tamil Nadu’s Museum of Possibilities has been designed keeping in mind our Divyang people. Mumbai’s Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj VastuSangrahalaya is such a museum, in which more than 70 thousand items have been preserved. Established in the year 2010, Indian Memory Project is a kind of online museum. It is engaged in connecting the links of India’s glorious history through pictures and stories sent from all over the world. An attempt has been made to bring to the fore the memories related to the horrors of Partition. In the past years too, we have seen new types of museums and memorials coming up in India. Ten new museums dedicated to the contribution of tribal brothers and sisters in the freedom struggle are being set up. Whether it is Biplobi Bharat Gallery in Kolkata’s Victoria Memorial or the revival of the Jallianwala Bagh Memorial. The P.M.Museum dedicated to all the former Prime Ministers of the country is also adding to the beauty of Delhi today. Everyday many people come to pay respects to martyrs at the National War Memorial and Police Memorial in Delhi itself. Whether it is the Dandi Memorial dedicated to the historic Dandi March or the Statue of Unity Museum,… well, I will have to stop here because the list of museums across the country is very long and for the first time the necessary information about all the museums in the country has also been compiled. On what theme the museum is based, what kind of objects are kept there, what their contact details are – all this is collated in an online directory. I urge you that whenever you get a chance, you must visit these museums in our country. Don’t forget to share the attractive pictures taken  there on #(Hashtag) Museum Memories. This will further strengthen the connection of us Indians with our glorious culture.
My dear countrymen, we all must have heard a saying many times, must have heard it over and over again – without water everything is avoid. Without water life is always in a crisis… the development of the individual and the country also comes to a standstill. Looking at this future challenge, today 75 Amrit Sarovars are being constructed in every district of the country. Our Amrit Sarovarsare special because, they are being built in the Azadi Ka Amrit Kal and the essence of the effort of the people has been put in them. You will be pleased to know that till now more than 50 thousand Amrit Sarovars have been constructed. This is a giant step towards water conservation.
Friends, we keep talking about the challenges related to water every summer. This time also we will take up this topic, but this time we will discuss the start-ups related to water conservation. There is a Start-Up – Fluxgen. This Start-Up provides water management options through I.O.T enabled technologies. This technology will tell us about the patterns of water usage and will help in effective use of water. Another startup is LivNSense. This is a platform based on artificial intelligence and machine learning. With its help, effective monitoring of water distribution can be done. From this it will also be ascertained where and how much water is being wasted. Another Start-Up is ‘KumbhiKagaz’. This KumbhiKagaz is a topic, I am sure you will like very much. KumbhiKagaz Start-Up has embarked upon a special task. They are working on making paper from water hyacinth, that is, water hyacinth, which was once considered a problem for water sources, is now being used to make paper.
Friends, if many youths are working through innovation and technology, there are many youths who are also engaged in the mission of making the society aware, like the youth of Balod district in Chhattisgarh. The youth here have started a campaign to save water. They go door-to-door to make people aware of water conservation. If there is an event like marriage somewhere, this group of youth goes there and gives information about how misuse of water can be stopped. An inspiring effort related to the efficient use of water is also being undertaken in Khunti district of Jharkhand. People in Khunti have found a way out of the water crisis through check dams. Due to accumulation of water from the check dams, greens and vegetables have also started growing here. On account of  this the income of the people is also increasing, and the needs of the region are also being fulfilled. Khunti has become a fascinating example of how any public participation effort brings with it many changes. I congratulate the people there for this endeavour.
My dear countrymen, during the 1965 war, our former Prime Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri had given the slogan of Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan. Later, Atal ji had also added Jai Vigyan to it. A few years ago, while talking to the scientists of the country, I talked about Jai Anusandhan. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, today’s reference is about such a person, about such an organization, which is a reflection of all these four, Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan, Jai Vigyan and Jai Anusandhan. This is a gentleman, Shriman Shivaji Shamrao Dole from Maharashtra. Shivaji Dole hails from a small village in Nashik district. He comes from a poor tribal farmer family, and is also an ex-serviceman. While in the army, he dedicated his life to the country. After retirement, he decided to learn something new and did a Diploma in Agriculture, that is, he moved towards Jai Jawan, Jai Kisan. Now every moment, he strives to ensure how to contribute maximum in the agriculture sector. In this campaign, Shivaji Dole ji formed a small team of 20 people and added some ex-servicemen to it. After this his team took over the management of a co-operative organization named Venkateshwara Co-Operative Power &Agro Processing Limited. This co-operative organization was lying dormant, which he took up the challenge of reviving. Today Venkateshwara Co-Operative has expanded to many districts in no time. Today this team is working in Maharashtra and Karnataka. About 18,000 people are associated with it, in which a large number of our Ex-Servicemen are also there. The members of this team are doing Agro Farming in more than 500 acres of land in Malegaon, Nashik. This team is also engaged in building many ponds for water conservation. The special thing is that they have also started Organic Farming and Dairy. Now grapes grown there are being exported to Europe as well. The two great features of this team, which attracted my attention, are these – Jai Vigyan and Jai Anusandhan. Its members are making maximum use of technology and Modern Agro Practices. The second feature is that they are also focusing on various certifications required for exports. I appreciate this team working with the spirit of ‘prosperity through cooperation’. This effort has not only empowered a large number of people, but has also created many means of livelihood. I hope this effort inspires every listener of ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
My dear countrymen, today the 28th of May, is the birth anniversary of the great freedom fighter, Veer Savarkar. The stories related to his sacrifice, courage and resolve inspire us all even today. I cannot forget the day when I went to the cell in Andaman where Veer Savarkar underwent the sentence of Kalapani. Veer Savarkar’s personality comprised firmness and magnanimity. His fearless and self-respecting nature did not appreciate the mentality of slavery at all. Not only the freedom movement, whatever Veer Savarkar did for social equality and social justice is remembered even today.
Friends, a few days later, on the 4th of June, is also the birth anniversary of Sant Kabirdas ji. The path shown by Kabirdas ji is equally relevant even today. Kabirdas ji used to say,
‘Kabira Kuan Ek hai, Pani Bhare AnekBartan mein hi bhed hai, Paani sab mein ek’
Which means: There could be myriad kinds of people who come to the well to draw water…But the well does not differentiate anyone…water remains the same in all utensils.
Sant Kabir opposed every evil practice that divided the society; tried to awaken the society. Today, when the country is moving forward with the determination to develop, we should increase our efforts to empower the society, taking inspiration from Sant Kabir.
My dear countrymen, I am now going to discuss with you about a great personality of the country who left an indelible mark through the the strength of his amazing talent in politics and the film industry. The name of this great personality is N.T. Rama Rao, whom we all know as NTR. Today, is the 100th birth anniversary of NTR. On the strength of his versatility of talent, he not only became the superstar of Telugu cinema, but also won the hearts of crores of people. Do you know that he had acted in more than 300 films? He revived many historical characters on the basis of his acting. People liked NTR’s acting in the roles of Bhagwan Krishna, Ram and many others, so much that they still remember him. NTR had carved out his own identity in the cinema world as well as in politics. There too, he got lots of love and blessings from the people. I offer my humble tribute to N.T Rama Rao ji, who ruled the hearts of millions of people in the country and the world.
My dear countrymen, that’s allthis time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Next time I will come to you with some new topics… till then the ‘heat’ would have increased more in some regions. It would have also start raining at some places. You have to take care of your health in every weather condition. We will also celebrate ‘World Yoga Day’ on 21st June. Preparations are going on for that too in the country and abroad. Do keep writing your ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to me about these preparations as well. If you get any more information on any other subject, then tell me that as well. My effort will be to include maximum suggestions in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Once again, many thanks to all of you. We’ll meet next month, till then I take leave of you.
Namaskar!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Once again a warm welcome to all of you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Usually ‘Mann Ki Baat’ comes your way on the last Sunday of every month, but this time it is being held a week earlier. All of you know, I’ll be in America next week and there the schedule is going to be pretty hectic, and hence I thought I’d talk to you before I go, what could be better than that! The blessings of the Janata-Janardan, the people, your inspiration, will also continue to enhance my energy.
Friends, many people say that as Prime Minister I did a certain good work, or some other great work. Many listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ shower praises in their letters. Some say a particular task was performed; others refer to a job well done; some express that a certain work was much better; in fact very good at that! But when I see the efforts of the common man of India, the sheer hard work, the will power, I myself am moved. Be it the loftiest goal, be it the toughest challenge, the collective might of the people of India, the collective power, provides a solution to every challenge. Just two-three days ago, we saw how big a cyclone hit the western part of the country… Strong winds, heavy rain. Cyclone Biparjoy caused a lot of destruction in Kutch. But, the courage and preparedness with which the people of Kutch fought such a dangerous cyclone is equally unprecedented too. Just a couple of days later, the people of Kutch are also going to celebrate their new year, that is, Ashadhi Beej. It is also a coincidence that Ashadhi Beej is considered a symbol of the onset of rains in Kutch. I have been going to Kutch for many years… I have also had the good fortune to serve the people there… and thats how I know very well the zest and fortitude of the people of Kutch. Kutch, was once termed as never to be able to recover after the devastating earthquake two decades ago… Today, the same district is one of the fastest growing districts of the country. I am sure the people of Kutch will rapidly emerge from the devastation caused by Cyclone Biperjoy.
Friends, no one has any control over natural calamities, but, the strength of disaster management that India has developed over the years, is becoming an example today. There is a significant way to combat natural calamities –viz. conservation of nature. These days during monsoon, our responsibility in this direction increases manifold. That is why today the country is making collective efforts through campaigns like ‘Catch the Rain’. Last month in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we had discussed about start-ups associated with water conservation. This time too I have come to know through letters about many people who are trying their very best to save every drop of water. One such friend is Tulsiram Yadav ji of Banda district of UP. Tulsiram Yadav ji is the Pradhan of Luktara Gram Panchayat. You too know that there have always been hardships regarding water in Banda and Bundelkhand regions. To overcome this challenge, Tulsiram ji has built more than 40 ponds in the area, taking the people of the village along with him. Tulsiram ji has made the basis of his campaign – farm water in farms, village water in villages. Today, the result of his hard work is that the ground water level in his village is improving. Similarly in Hapur district in U.P., people collectively have revived an extinct river. A long time ago, there used to be a river here named Neem. As time went by, she disappeared, but was always remembered in local memories and folklore. Eventually, people decided to revive this natural heritage of theirs. On account of the collective efforts of the people, the Neem river has started flowing again. The point of origin of the river, the headwater is also being developed as an Amrit Sarovar.
Friends, these rivers, canals, lakes are not only water sources… life’s myriad hues & emotions are also associated with them. A similar scene was observed in Maharashtra just a few days ago. This particular area mostly remains in the grip of drought. After waiting for five decades, the canal work of Nilwande Dam is now being completed here. A few days ago, water was released in the canal during testing. The pictures that came up during this time were really emotional. The people of the village were rejoicing as if it were the Holi-Diwali festival!
Friends, when it comes to management, I will also remember Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj today. Along with the bravery of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj, there is a lot to learn from his governance and management skills. In particular, the work done by Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj regarding water management and navy, they raise the glory of Indian history even today. The Sea-forts built by him still stand proudly in the middle of the sea even after so many centuries. The beginning of this month itself marks the completion of 350 years of the coronation of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj. This occasion is being celebrated as a big festival. During this, grand programs related to it were organized in Raigad Fort in Maharashtra. I remember, many years ago in 2014, I had the good fortune to go to Raigad and pay obeisance to that holy land. It is the duty of all of us to know about the management skills of Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj on this occasion, learn from him. This will instill in us a sense of pride in our heritage, and will also inspire us to perform our duties in the future.
My dear countrymen, you must have heard about the tiny squirrel from the Ramayana, who came forward to help build the Ram Setu. What I mean to say is that when the intention is noble, there is honesty in the efforts, no goal remains insurmountable. Today, India too, with a noble intention, is facing a huge challenge. The challenge is– T.B., or tuberculosis. India has resolved to create a T.B. free India by 2025. The goal is certainly a lofty one. There was a time when, after coming to know about T.B., family members used to turn away, but today T.B. patients are being helped by making them family members. To eliminate tuberculosis from the root, Nikshay Mitras have taken the lead. A large number of varied social organizations have become Nikshay Mitra in the country. Thousands of people in villages & Panchayats have come forward themselves and adopted T.B. patients. There are many children who have come forward to help TB patients. This public participation is the biggest strength of this campaign. It is due to this participation, that today, more than 10 lakh TB patients in the country have been adopted… and this is a noble deed on the part of close to 85 thousand Nikshay Mitras. I am happy that many sarpanchs of the country, even the village heads, have taken this initiative that they will spare no effort to uproot TB from their villages.
Shriman Dikar Singh Mewari, a Nikshay friend of a village in Nainital, has adopted six TB patients. Similarly, Shriman Gyan Singh, head of a village panchayat of Kinnaur and a Nikshay Mitra also is engaged in providing every necessary help to TB patients in his block. Our children and young friends are also not far behind in the campaign to make India TB free. Look at the wonder of Nalini Singh, a 7-year-old daughter from Una, Himachal Pradesh. Daughter Nalini, is helping T. B. patients through her pocket money.You know how much kids love piggy banks, but 13-year-old Meenakshi from Katni district of MP and 11-year-old Bashwar Mukherjee from Diamond Harbor in West Bengal are both different kids. Both these children have also handed over their piggy bank money to the T.B.-free-India campaign. All these examples, apart from evoking emotions, are also very inspiring. I heartily appreciate all these children who are thinking big at a tender age.
My dear countrymen, it is the nature of us Indians to be always ready to welcome new ideas. We love our things and also imbibe new things. An example of this is – Japan’s technique Miyawaki; if the soil at some place has not been fertile, then the Miyawaki technique is a very good way to make that area green again. Miyawaki forests spread rapidly and become biodiversity spots in two to three decades. This is now spreading very fast in different parts of India too. Shriman Raafi Ramnath, a teacher from Kerala, changed the scenario of the area with this technique. Actually, Ramnath ji wanted to explain deeply about nature and environment to his students. For this he went to the extent of creating a herbal garden. His garden has now become a Biodiversity Zone. This success of his inspired him even more. After this, Raafi ji grew a mini forest with the Miyawaki technique and named it – ‘Vidyavanam’. Now only a teacher can come up with such a beautiful name – ‘Vidyavanam’. In the tiny space in this Vidyavanam of Ramnathji, over 450 trees of 115 varieties were planted. His students also help him in their maintenance. School children from the neighbourhood & common citizens throng in hordes to view this beautiful place. Miyawaki forests can be easily grown anywhere, even in cities. Some time ago, I had inaugurated a Miyawaki forest in Kevadia, Ekta Nagar in Gujarat. In Kutch too, in the memory of the people who died in the 2001 earthquake, a Smriti-Van has been built in the Miyawaki style. Its success in a place like Kutch shows how effective this technology is, even in the toughest of natural environments. Similarly, saplings have been planted in Ambaji and Pavagadh by the Miyawaki method. I have come to know that a Miyawaki garden is also being created in Aliganj, Lucknow. In the last four years, work has been done on more than 60 such forests in Mumbai and its surrounding areas. Now this technique is being appreciated all over the world. It is being used extensively in many countries like Singapore, Paris, Australia, Malaysia. I would urge the countrymen, especially those living in cities, to make an effort to learn about the Miyawaki method. Through this, you can make invaluable contribution in making our earth and nature green and clean.
My dear countrymen, nowadays there is a lot of discussion about Jammu and Kashmir in our country. Sometimes due to rising tourism, at times due to the spectacular events of G-20. Some time ago I had told you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ how ‘Nadru’ of Kashmir are being relished outside the country as well. Now the people of Baramulla district of Jammu and Kashmir have done a wonderful job. Farming has been going on in Baramulla for a long time, but here, there was a shortage of milk. The people of Baramulla took this challenge as an opportunity. A large number of people started dairy farming here. The women here came to the forefront of this task, such as a sister – Ishrat Nabi. Ishrat, a graduate, has started Mir Sisters Dairy Farm. About 150 litres of milk is being sold every day from their dairy farm. Similarly, one such friend is from Sopore… Wasim Anayat. Wasim has more than two dozen animals and he sells more than two hundred liters of milk every day. Another youth Abid Hussain is also doing dairy farming. His work is also progressing a lot. Due to the hard work of such people, 5.5 lakh liters of milk is being produced daily in Baramulla. The entire Baramulla is turning into the symbol of a new white revolution. During the last two-and-a-half – three years, more than 500 dairy units have come up here. The dairy industry of Baramulla is a testimony to the fact that every part of our country is full of possibilities. The collective will of the people of a region can achieve any goal.
My dear countrymen, this month many a great news has come in for India from the sports world. The Indian team has raised the glory of the Tricolor by winning the Women’s Junior Asia Cup for the first time. This month itself our Men’s Hockey Team has also won the Junior Asia Cup. With that, we have also become the team with the most wins in the history of this tournament. Our junior team also did wonders in the Junior Shooting World Cup. The Indian team has secured the first position in this tournament. Out of the total gold medals in this tournament, 20% have come in India’s account alone. The Asian under Twenty Athletics Championship has also been held this June. In this, India remained in the top three in the medal tally among 45 countries.
Friends, earlier there used to be a time when we used to come to know about international events, but, often there was no mention of India in them. But, today, I am just mentioning the successes of the past few weeks, even then the list becomes so long. This is the real strength of our youth. There are many such sports and competitions, where today, for the first time, India is making her presence felt. For example, in long jump, Shrishankar Murali has won a bronze for the country in a prestigious event like the Paris Diamond League. This is India’s first medal in this competition. One such similar success has been registered by our Under Seventeen Women Wrestling Team in Kyrgyzstan. I congratulate all these athletes of the country, their parents and coaches for their efforts.
Friends, behind this success of the country in international events, is the hard work of our sportspersons at the national level. Today, sports are organized with a new enthusiasm in different states of the country. They give players a chance to play, win and to learn from defeat. For example, Khelo India University Games were organized in Uttar Pradesh recently. A lot of enthusiasm was observed in the youth. Our youth have broken 11 records in these games… Punjab University, Amritsar’s Guru Nanak Dev University and Karnataka’s Jain University have occupied the first three places in the medal tally.
Friends, a major aspect of such tournaments is that many inspiring stories of young players come to the fore. In the rowing event at the Khelo India University Games, Assam’s Cotton University’s Anyatam Rajkumar became the first Divyang athlete to participate in it. Nidhi Pawaiya of Barkatullah University managed to win a Gold Medal in Shot-put despite a serious knee injury. Shubham Bhandare of Savitribai Phule Pune University, who had suffered a disappointment in Bangalore last year due to an ankle injury, has become a Gold Medalist in Steeplechase this time. Similarly, Saraswati Kundu of Burdwan University is the captain of her Kabaddi team. She has crossed many difficulties and reached there. Many of the best performing Athletes are also getting a lot of help from the TOPS Scheme. The more our sportspersons play, the more they’ll bloom.
My dear countrymen, 21st June is also round the corner. This time too, people in every nook and corner of the world are eagerly waiting for the International Day of Yoga. This year the theme of Yoga Day is – ‘Yoga For Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’ i.e. Yoga for the welfare of all in the form of ‘One World-One Family’. It expresses the spirit of Yoga, which unites and takes everyone along. Like every time, this time too programs related to yoga will be organized in every corner of the country.
Friends, this time I will get the opportunity to participate in the Yoga Day program to be held at the United Nations Headquarters in New York. I see that even on social media, there is tremendous enthusiasm about Yoga Day.
Friends, I urge all of you to adopt yoga in your life, make it a part of your daily routine. If you are still not connected with yoga, then the 21st of June is a great opportunity for this resolve. There is no need for many frills in yoga anyway. See, when you join yoga, what a big change will come in your life.
My dear countrymen, the day after tomorrow i.e. the 20th of June is the day of the historical Rath Yatra. Rath Yatra bears a unique identity through out the world. Lord Jagannath’s Rath Yatra is taken out with great fanfare in different states of the country. The Rath Yatra in Puri, Odisha is a wonder in itself. When I was in Gujarat, I used to get the opportunity to attend the great Rath Yatra in Ahmedabad. The way people from all over the country, every society, every class turn up in these Rath Yatras is exemplary in itself. Along with inner faith, it is also a reflection of the spirit of Ek Bharat- Shreshtha Bharat. My best wishes to all of you on this auspicious occasion. I pray that Lord Jagannath blesses all countrymen with good health, happiness and prosperity.
Friends, while discussing the festivals related to Indian tradition and culture, I must also mention the interesting events held in the Raj Bhavans of the country. Now Raj Bhavans in the country are being identified with social and development work. Today, our Raj Bhavans are becoming the flag bearers of the T.B.-Free India campaign & the campaign related to Organic farming. In the past, be it Gujarat, Goa, Telangana, Maharashtra, Sikkim, the enthusiasm with which different Raj Bhavans celebrated their foundation days is an example in itself. This is a wonderful initiative which empowers the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat-Shreshtha Bharat’.
Friends, India is the mother of democracy. We consider our democratic ideals as paramount, we consider our Constitution as Supreme… therefore, we can never forget June the 25th. This is the very day when Emergency was imposed on our country. It was a dark period in the history of India. Lakhs of people opposed the emergency with full might. The supporters of democracy were tortured so much during that time, that even today, it makes the mind tremble. Many books have been written on these atrocities; the punishment meted out by the police and administration. I had also got the opportunity to write a book named ‘Sangharsh Mein Gujarat’ at that time. A few days ago I came across another book written on the Emergency, – Torture of Political Prisoners in India. This book, published during the Emergency, describes how, at that time, the government was treating the guardians of democracy most cruelly. There are many case studies in this book, there are many pictures. I wish that, today, when we are celebrating the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav we must also have a glance at such crimes which endanger the freedom of the country. This will make it easier for today’s young generation to understand the meaning and significance of democracy.
My dear countrymen, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is a beautiful garland adorned with colourful pearls… each pearl unique and priceless in itself. Every episode of this program is full of life. Along with the feeling of collectivity, it fills us with a sense of duty and service towards the society. Here those topics are discussed openly, about which we usually get to read and hear very little. We often see how many countrymen got new inspiration after a certain topic was mentioned in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Recently I received a letter from the country’s famous Indian classical dancer Ananda Shankar Jayant. In her letter, she has written about that episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, in which we had discussed about story telling. In that program, we had acknowledged the talent of the people associated with this field. Inspired by that program of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Ananda Shankar Jayant has prepared ‘Kutti Kahani’. This is a great collection of stories from different languages meant for children. This effort is very good, also since it deepens our children’s attachment to their culture. She has also uploaded some interesting videos of these stories on her YouTube channel. I specifically mentioned this effort of Ananda Shankar Jayant because I felt very happy to see how the good deeds of the countrymen are inspiring others too. Learning from this, they also try to do something better for the country and society with their skills. This is the collective power of the people of India, which is instilling new strength in the progress of the country.
My dear countrymen, that’s all this time with me in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. See you again, next time, with new topics. It is the seasons of rains, hence, take good care of your health. Have a balanced diet and stay healthy. And yes! Certainly do yoga. Now summer vacations are about to end in many schools. I would also tell the children not to keep their homework pending for the last day. Finish your work and be at ease. Thank you very much!
My dear countrymen, Namaskar.
A warm welcome to all of you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The month of July means the month of monsoon, the month of rain. The past few days have been full of anxiety and hardships on account of natural calamities. Owing to flooding in many rivers including the Yamuna, people in many areas have had to suffer. Landslides have also occurred in hilly areas. Meanwhile, in the western part of the country, Biparjoy cyclone also hit the areas of Gujarat some time ago. But friends, in the midst of these calamities, all of us countrymen have once again brought to the fore the power of collective effort. The local people, our NDRF jawans, those from the local administration have worked day and night to combat such calamities. Our capabilities and resources play a big role in dealing with any disaster – but at the same time, our sensitivity and the spirit of hand-holding is equally important. This spirit of Sarvajan Hitaaya is the hallmark of India as well as the strength of India.
Friends, this phase of rain is equally important for ‘tree plantation’ and ‘water conservation’. More than 60 thousand Amrit Sarovars built during the ‘Azaadi ka Amrit Mahotsav’ are increasingly radiating their glow. Presently, the work of building more than 50 thousand Amrit Sarovars is going on. Our countrymen are making novel efforts for ‘water conservation’ with full awareness and responsibility. You might remember, sometime ago, I had gone to Shahdol, M.P. There I met tribal brothers and sisters of Pakaria village. At the same time, I had a discussion with them to save nature and water. Now I have come to know that the tribal brothers and sisters of Pakaria village have already started working on this. Here, with the help of the administration, people have converted about a hundred wells into water recharge systems. Rain water now flows into these wells, and from the wells, the water enters the ground. This will gradually improve the ground water level in the area. Now all the villagers have set a target of using about 800 wells in the entire area for recharging. One such encouraging news has come in from U.P. A few days ago, in Uttar Pradesh, a record of planting 30 crore trees in a single day has been made. This campaign was started by the state government; it was completed by the people there. Such efforts are great examples of public participation as well as public awareness. I would like all of us to be a part of these efforts to plant trees and save water.
My dear countrymen, at present the holy month of ‘Saawan’ is going on. Along with worshiping Sadashiv Mahadev, ‘Sawan’ is associated with greenery and joy. That’s why, ‘Sawan’ has been very important from the spiritual as well as cultural point of view. The swings of Sawan, the mehendi of Sawan, the festivities of Sawan… that is, ‘Sawan’ itself means joy and enthusiasm.
Friends, there is yet another facet to this faith and these traditions of ours. These festivals and traditions of ours make us dynamic. Many devotees undertake the Kanwar Yatra to worship Shiva in Sawan. These days numerous devotees are reaching the 12 Jyotirlingas on account of ‘Sawan’. You would also be happy to know that the number of people reaching Banaras is also breaking records. Now more than 10 crore tourists are reaching Kashi every year. The number of devotees visiting pilgrimages like Ayodhya, Mathura, Ujjain is also increasing rapidly. Due to this lakhs of poor are getting employment; their livelihood is being taken care of. All this is the result of our collective cultural awakening. Now, for ‘darshan’, people from all over the world are coming to our pilgrimage sites. I have come to know about two such American friends who had come here from California to perform the Amarnath Yatra. These foreign guests had heard somewhere about the experiences of Swami Vivekananda related to the Amarnath Yatra. They got so inspired that they themselves came for the Amarnath Yatra. They consider it as the blessings of Lord Bholenath. This is the specialty of India that she accepts everyone, gives something or the other to everyone. Similarly there is a woman of French origin – Charlotte Chopin. Recently, when I had gone to France, I had met her. Charlotte Chopin is a Yoga Practitioner, Yoga Teacher, and she is more than a 100 years old. She has crossed a century. She has been practicing yoga for the last 40 years. She gives credit for her health and this age of 100 years only to yoga. She has become a prominent face of India’s science of yoga and its strength, in the world. Everyone should learn from her. Let us not only embrace our heritage, but also present it responsibly to the world. And I am happy that one such effort is going on in Ujjain these days. Here 18 painters from all over the country are making attractive picture story books based on the Puranas. These paintings will be made in many distinctive styles such as the Bundi style, Nathdwara style, Pahari style and Apabhramsh style. These will be displayed in Ujjain’s Triveni Museum… after some time, when you visit Ujjain; you will be able to see another divine site along with Mahakal Mahalok.
Friends, while referring to these paintings being made in Ujjain, I am reminded of another unique painting. This painting had been made by Prabhat Singh Modbhai Barhat, an artist from Rajkot.
This painting was based on an incident in the life of Chhatrapati Veer Shivaji Maharaj. Artist Prabhat Bhai had depicted that Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj was going to visit his Kuldevi ‘Tulja Mata’ after the coronation, and what the atmosphere there at that time was. To keep our traditions, our heritage alive, we have to save it, live it, teach it to the next generation. I am happy that, today, many efforts are being made in this direction.
My dear countrymen,
Many a time, when we hear words like Ecology, Flora, Fauna, Bio Diversity, some people think that these are specialized subjects; subjects related to experts. But it is not so. If we really love nature, we can do a lot even with our small efforts. Suresh Raghavan ji is a friend from Vadavalli in Tamil Nadu. Raghavan ji is fond of painting. You know, painting is a work related to art and canvas, but Raghavan ji decided that he would preserve the information about plants and animals through his paintings. He documents the information related to them by making paintings of varied Flora and Fauna. Till now he has made paintings of dozens of such birds, animals, orchids, which are on the verge of extinction. This example of serving nature through art is really amazing.
My dear countrymen, today I want to tell you one more interesting thing. A few days ago an awesome craze appeared on social media. America has returned to us more than a hundred rare and ancient artefacts. After this news came to the fore, there was a lot of discussion on social media about these artefacts. The youth displayed a sense of pride in their heritage. These artefacts returned to India are 2500 to 250 years old. You will also be happy to know that these rare items are related to different regions of the country. These have been made using Terracotta, Stone, Metal and Wood. Some of these are such that they will fill you with wonder. If you have a look at them, you will be left mesmerised. You will also get to see a beautiful sandstone sculpture of the 11th century among these. This is an artwork of an ‘Apsara’ dancing, which belongs to Madhya Pradesh. Many idols of the Chola era are also part of these. The idols of Devi and Lord Murugan date back to the 12th century and are associated with the rich culture of Tamil Nadu. Nearly a thousand year old bronze statue of Lord Ganesha has also been returned to India. An idol of Uma-Maheshwara in Lalitasan is said to be of the 11th century, in which both of them are seated on Nandi. Two stone idols of Jain Tirthankaras have also come back to India. Two idols of Bhagwan Surya Dev will also enthrall you. One of these is made of Sandstone. Among the items returned is a panel made of wood, which brings to the fore the story of the churning of the ocean. This panel of 16th-17th century is associated with South India.
Friends, I have mentioned just a few names here, whereas, if you see, this list is very long. I would like to thank the American government, who have returned this valuable heritage of ours. Even when I visited America in 2016 and 2021, many artefacts were returned to India. I am sure that with such efforts, awareness will increase across the country to stop the theft of our cultural heritage. This will further deepen the attachment of the countrymen with our rich heritage.
My dear countrymen, the letters written by some mothers and sisters of Devbhoomi Uttarakhand to me are touchingly heart-warming. They have given many blessings to their son, their brother. They have written that – ‘They had never imagined that our erstwhile cultural heritage ‘Bhojpatra’ could become a means of their livelihood. You must be wondering what the entire matter is!
Friends, this letter has been written to me by the women of Niti-Mana valley in Chamoli district. These are the women who had presented me a unique artwork on Bhojpatra in October last year. I was also overwhelmed on receiving this gift. After all, since ancient times, our scriptures and books have been preserved on these Bhojpatras. Mahabharata was also written on the Bhojpatra. Today, these women of Devbhoomi are making very beautiful artefacts and souvenirs from the Bhojpatra. During my visit to Mana village, I had appreciated his unique effort. I had appealed to the tourists coming to Devbhoomi to buy as many local products as possible during their visit. It has had a great impact there. Today, the products of Bhojpatra are very much liked by the pilgrims coming here and are also buying it at good prices. This ancient heritage of Bhojpatra is filling new hues of happiness in the lives of the women of Uttarakhand. I am also happy to know that the state government is also imparting training to women to make novel products from Bhojpatra.
The state government has also started a campaign to preserve the rare species of Bhojpatra. The areas which were once considered as the last point of the land are now being developed considering them as the first villages of the country. Along with preserving our tradition and culture, this effort is also becoming a means of economic progress.
My dear countrymen, I have also received a large number of such letters this time in ‘Man Ki Baat’ that give a lot of satisfaction to the mind. These letters have been written by those Muslim women who have recently come from Haj pilgrimage. This journey of theirs is very special in many ways. These are the women, who have performed Hajj without any male companion or mehram, and the number is not fifty or hundred, but more than four thousand – this is a huge transformation. Earlier, Muslim women were not allowed to perform ‘Hajj’ without Mehram. Through Mann Ki Baat, I also express my heartfelt gratitude to the Government of Saudi Arabia. Women coordinators were specially appointed for women going on ‘Haj’ without Mehram.
Friends, the changes that have been made in the Haj Policy in the last few years are being highly appreciated. Our Muslim mothers and sisters have written a lot to me about this. Now, more and more people are getting the chance to go for ‘Haj’. The blessing given by the people who have returned from Haj pilgrimage, especially our mothers and sisters through their letters, is very inspiring in itself.
My dear countrymen, whether be the Musical Nights in Jammu -Kashmir, Bike Rallies at High Altitudes, local clubs in Chandigarh, and the many sports groups in Punjab,… it sounds like we are talking about entertainment and adventure. But it’s something different…, this event is also related to a ‘common cause’. And this common cause is the awareness campaign against drugs. To save the youth of Jammu and Kashmir from drugs, many innovative efforts have been visible. Programs like Musical Night, Bike Rallies are happening there. To spread this message in Chandigarh, Local Clubs have been linked with it. They call these VADA clubs. VADA means Victory Against Drug Abuse. Many sports groups have also been formed in Punjab, which are running awareness campaigns to focus on fitness and get rid of drug addiction. The increasing participation of youth in the campaign against drug abuse is very encouraging. These efforts lend a lot of strength to the campaign against drugs in India. If we want to save the future generations of the country, we have to keep them away from drugs. With this thought, ‘NashaMukt Bharat Abhiyan’ was launched on the 15 August 2020. More than 11 crore people have been connected with this campaign. Two weeks ago, India has taken a huge action against drugs. After seizing about 1.5 lakh kg consignment of drugs, it has been destroyed. India has also created a unique record of destroying 10 lakh kg of drugs. The cost of these drugs was more than Rs 12,000 crore. I would like to appreciate all those who are contributing in this noble campaign of de-addiction. Drug addiction becomes a big problem not only for the family, but for the whole society. In such a situation, for this danger to end forever, it is necessary that we all move forward in this direction in unison.
My dear countrymen, while talking about drugs and the young generation, I would also like to tell you about an inspiring journey from Madhya Pradesh. This is the Inspiring Journey of Mini Brazil. You must be thinking that from where Mini Brazil came in Madhya Pradesh, well, that is the twist. In MP, Bicharpur is a village in Shahdol. Bicharpur is called Mini Brazil. ‘Mini Brazil’, since, today this village has become a stronghold of the rising stars of football. When I had gone to Shahdol a few weeks ago, I met many such football players there. I felt that our countrymen and especially our young friends must know about this.
Friends, The journey of Bichharpur village to become Mini Brazil commenced two-and-a-half decades ago. During that time, Bicharpur village was infamous for illicit liquor,… it was in the grip of intoxication. The biggest brunt of this kind of environment was being borne by the youth here. Raees Ahmed, a former national player and coach, recognized the talent of these youngsters. Raees ji did not have many resources, but he started teaching football to the youth with full dedication. Within a few years, football became so popular that Bicharpur village itself was identified with football. Now a program called Football Kranti is also going on here. Under this program, youth are connected with this game and they are given training. This program has been so successful that more than 40 national and state level players have emerged from Bicharpur. This football revolution is now slowly spreading in the entire region. More than 1200 football clubs have been formed in Shahdol and its surrounding areas. A large number of players are emerging from here, who are playing at the national level. Today, many noted former football players and coaches are imparting training to the youth here. Just imagine a tribal area which was known for illicit liquor, infamous for drug addiction, has now become the Football Nursery of the country. That’s why it is said – where there is a will, there is a way. There is no dearth of talent in our country. There is certainly a need to find and nurture them. Subsequently, these youth also bring laurels to the country and lend direction to the development of the country as well.
My dear countrymen, on the occasion of completion of 75 years of independence, all of us are celebrating ‘Amrit Mahotsav’ with full enthusiasm. About two lakh programs have been organized in the country during the ‘Amrit Mahotsav’. These programs were adorned with a spectrum of colours… were full of diversity. The beauty of these events has been that a record number of youth participated them. During this, our youth got to know a lot about the great personalities of the country. If we talk about just the first few months, we got to see many interesting programs related to public participation. One such program was – ‘Writers’ Meet’ organized for Divyang writers. The participation of a record number of people was observed. At the same time, ‘National Sanskrit Conference’ was organized in Tirupati, Andhra Pradesh. We all know the importance of forts in our history. A campaign depicting this, ‘Qile aur Kahaniyan’ i.e. stories related to Forts were also liked by people.
Friends, in the midst of the ongoing reverberations of Amrit Mahotsav and the 15th of August round the corner, another great campaign is on the verge of being launched in the country. ‘Meri Mati Mera Desh’ campaign will be launched to honour our martyred braveheart men and women. Under this, many programs will be organized across the country in the memory of our immortal martyrs. In the memory of these luminaries, special inscriptions will also be installed in lakhs of village panchayats of the country. Under this campaign, ‘Amrit Kalash Yatra’ will also be organised across the country. This ‘Amrit Kalash Yatra’ carrying soil in 7500 urns from every corner of the country will reach Delhi, the capital of the country. This journey will also carry with it saplings from different parts of the country. ‘Amrit Vatika’ will be built near the National War Memorial by fusing the soil and saplings that would arrive in 7500 urns. This ‘Amrit Vatika’ will also become a grand symbol of ‘Ek Bharat Shresth Bharat’. I had talked about ‘Panch Prana’ for the next 25 years of Amritkal from Red Fort last year. By participating in the ‘Meri Mati Mera Desh’ campaign, we will also take an oath to fulfil these ‘five resolves’. All of you should certainly upload your selfies on yuva.gov.in while taking oath, holding the sacred soil of the country. Last year on the occasion of Independence Day, the whole country came together for ‘Har GharTiranga Abhiyan’,… similarly this time too we have to hoist the Tricolor at every house, and continue this tradition. With these efforts, we will realize our duties… we will realize the innumerable sacrifices made for the freedom of the country; we will realize the value of freedom. Hence, every countryman must join in these efforts.
My dear countrymen, that’s all for today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
In a few days we will be a part of this great festival of independence on the 15th of August. We should always remember those who laid down their lives for the freedom of the country. We have to work day and night to make their dreams come true and ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is just the medium to bring this hard work and collective efforts of the countrymen to the fore. See you next time, with some new topics. Thank you very much
My dear family members, Namaskar. A very warm welcome to you once again in the August episode of Mann Ki Baat. I don’t recall if it has ever happened that in the month of Sawan, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ program was held twice, but, this time, the same is happening. Sawan means the month of Mahashiv, the month of festivities and fervour. The success of Chandrayaan has enhanced this atmosphere of celebration manifold. It has been more than three days that Chandrayaan has reached the moon. This success is so grand that any amount of discussion about it would be inadequate. When I am talking to you today, I am reminded of a few lines of an old poem of mine…
Raise your head high
To slice the densest of clouds
It’s time to devote ourselves
To the resolve of spreading radiance
Well, the sun has just risen
Treading ahead with a firm resolve,
Crossing every deterrent; nay barrier
To dispel the scourge of utter darkness
Well, the sun has just risen.
And then one realises…
Even the sun has just risen…
Albeit…shining across many a dense cloud
Yet….holding the head sky high!
My family members, on the 23rd of August, India and India’s Chandrayaan have proved that some suns of resolve rise on the moon as well. Mission Chandrayaan has become a symbol of the spirit of New India, which wants to ensure victory, and also knows how to win in any situation.
Friends, there has been one aspect of this mission which I specially want to discuss with all of you today. You might remember this time I have expressed from Red Fort that we have to strengthen Women Led Development as a national character. Where the might of women power is added, the impossible can also be made possible. India’s Mission Chandrayaan is also a live example of woman power. Many women scientists and engineers have been directly involved in this entire mission. They have handled many important responsibilities like project director, project manager of different systems. The daughters of India are now challenging even the Space which is considered infinite. When the daughters of a country become so ambitious, who can stop that country from becoming developed!
Friends, we have accomplished such a lofty flight since today our dreams are big and our efforts are also big. Along with our scientists, other sectors have also played an important role in the success of Chandrayaan-3. Many countrymen have contributed in ensuring all the parts and meeting technical requirements. When everyone’s efforts converged, success was also achieved. This is the biggest success of Chandrayaan-3. I wish that in future too our space sector will achieve innumerable successes like this with collective efforts.
My family members, the month of September is going to be witness to the potential of India. India is fully prepared for the G-20 Leaders Summit to be held next month. Heads of 40 countries and many Global Organizations are coming to the capital Delhi to participate in this event. This will be the biggest participation ever in the history of the G-20 Summit. During her presidency, India has made G-20 a more inclusive forum. The African Union also joined the G-20 on India’s invitation and the voice of the people of Africa reached this important platform of the world. Friends, since India took over the presidency of the G-20 in Bali last year, so much has happened that it fills us with pride. Moving away from the tradition of holding big events in Delhi, we took them to different cities of the country. About 200 meetings related to this were organized in 60 cities across the country. Wherever the G-20 Delegates went, people warmly welcomed them. These delegates were very impressed, seeing the diversity of our country and our vibrant democracy. They also realized that there are so many possibilities in India.
Friends, Our Presidency of the G-20 is a People’s Presidency, in which the spirit of public participation is at the forefront. Among the eleven Engagement Groups of G-20, Academia, Civil Society, Youth, Women, our Parliamentarians, Entrepreneurs and people associated with Urban Administration played an important role. In one way or the other, more than 1.5 crore people are associated with the events being organized across the country regarding this. In this effort of ours for public participation, not just one, but two world records have also been created. The participation of 1.25 lakh students from 800 schools in the G-20 Quiz held in Varanasi became a new world record. At the same time, the Lambani artisans also did wonders. 450 artisans have showcased their skill and craftsmanship by creating an amazing collection of around 1800 Unique Patches. Every representative who came to the G-20 was amazed to see the artistic diversity of our country. One such grand program was organized in Surat. 15,000 women from 15 states participated in the ‘Saree Walkathon’ held there. This program not only gave a boost to Surat’s Textile Industry, ‘Vocal for Local’ also got a fillip and also paved the way for Local to become Global. After the G-20 meeting in Srinagar, a huge increase in the number of tourists to Kashmir is being seen. I urge all countrymen to come together to make the G-20 summit successful and bring glory to the country.
My family members, in episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we often discuss the potential of our young generation. Today, sports is one area where our youth are continuously achieving new successes. Today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I will talk about a tournament where recently our players have raised the national flag. A few days ago the World University Games were held in China. India displayed her best ever performance in these games this time. Our players won 26 medals in all, out of which 11 were Gold Medals. You will be pleased to know that even if we add all the medals won in all the World University Games that have been held since 1959, this number reaches only 18. In all these decades just 18 whereas this time our players won 26 medals. Hence, some young sportspersons, students who have won medals in the World University Games are currently connected with me on the phone line. Let me first tell you about them. Pragati, a resident of UP, has won a medal in Archery. Amlan, a resident of Assam, has won a medal in Athletics. Priyanka, a resident of UP, has won a medal in Race Walk. Abhidanya, a resident of Maharashtra, has won a medal in Shooting.
Modi ji :- Namaskar my dear young players.
Young player :- Namaste Sir.
Modi ji :- It’s a nice feeling taking to you. First of all, I congratulate the team selected from the universities of India… you people have brought glory to the name of India. You have made every countryman proud through your performance in the World University Games. So first of all I congratulate you heartily.
Pragati, I am starting this conversation with you. First of all, tell me what had you thought when you left after winning two medals? And having achieved such a big victory, what are you feeling?
Pragati :- Sir, I was feeling very proud, I was feeling so good that I had returned with my country’s flag hoisted so high… it is okay that once I had reached the Gold Fight, I had lost it and was regretting it. But the second time it was in my mind that if something happens now, I will not let it lower down. It has to flutter the highest in any situation. When we won the fight at the end, we celebrated very well on the same podium. That moment was very good. I was feeling so proud that I could not measure the feeling.
Modi ji :- Pragati, you were facing a big problem physically. You emerged out of that. This in itself is a great inspiration for the youth of the country. What had happened to you?
Pragati:- Sir, on the 5th of May, 2020, I had brain haemorrhage. I was on the ventilator. There was no surety whether I would survive or not and if at all, how would I survive? But certainly… yes, I had the inner courage that I have to go back to stand on the ground. I have to shoot the Arrow. If my life has been saved then the biggest role is of God, then doctor, then Archery.
Modi ji :- Amlan is also with us. Amlan, tell me how you developed so much of interest in athletics!
Amlan :- Ji Namaskar Sir.
Modi ji :- Namaskar, Namaskar
Amlan :- Sir, earlier there was not much interest towards Athletics. Earlier we were more into Football. But as my brother’s friend told me that Amlan you should go for athletics competitions. So I thought okay, so the first time I played the State Meet, I lost in it. I didn’t like the defeat. So gradually, I got into athletics. Then slowly, now it is starting to be fun. So just like that my interest grew.
Modi ji :- Amlan just tell me where did you practice mostly!
Amlan :- Mostly I have practiced in Hyderabad, Under Sai Reddy sir. Then after that there was a shift to Bhubaneswar and from there I started professionally sir.
Ok, Priyanka is also with us. Priyanka, you were part of the 20 kilometer Race Walk Team. The whole country is listening to you today, and they want to know about this sport. Tell us what kind of skills are required for this. And what has been the trajectory of your career?
Priyanka :- In an event like mine it is very tough because there are five judges present. Even if we run, they will expel us or even if we get off the road a little, they will declare us out even if there is a jump. Or even if we bend our knees, they expel us and I was even given a warning twice. After that, I controlled my speed so much since somehow I had to win the team medal, at least from here. Because we have come here for the country and we do not want to leave empty handed.
Modi ji :- Yes, and are father, brother and others all fine?
Priyanka :- Yes sir, everything is fine, I tell everyone that you motivate us so much, really sir, I am feeling very good, because there is not even a lot of demand for a game like World University in India. It goes, but now we are getting so much support in this game also… we are seeing tweets…everyone is tweeting that we have won so many medals, so it is feeling very good that like Olympics, this too, is getting so much of encouragement.
Modi ji: Well, Priyanka, congratulations from my side. You have made a big name, let us talk to Abhidanya.
Abhidanya :- Namaste Sir.
Modi ji: Tell me about yourself.
Abhidanya :- Sir I am from Kolhapur proper, Maharashtra, I do both 25 metres sports pistol and 10 metres air pistol events in shooting. Both my parents are high school teachers and I started shooting in 2015. When I started shooting, there were not that many facilities available in Kolhapur. It takes one and a half hour to travel from Vadgaon to Kolhapur by bus, then one and a half hour to come back, and four hours of training, so like that, 6-7 hours for travelling and training, so I used to miss my school too, then Mummy-Papa said that beta, do one thing, we will take you to the shooting range on Saturday-Sunday, and the rest of the time you do other games. So I used to play a lot of games in my childhood, because both my parents were very much interested in sports, but they could not do anything, financial support was not that much and there was not that much of information available. Hence my mother had a big dream…wanted me to represent the country and then win a medal for the country. So to fulfil her dream, I used to take a lot of interest in sports since childhood and then I have also done Taekwondo, in that too, I am a black belt, and after doing many games like Boxing, Judo, fencing and discus throw, I came to shooting. Then I struggled a lot for 2-3 years and for the first time I got selected in Malaysia for the University Championship and I got Bronze Medal in that, so I actually got a push from there. Then my school made a shooting range for me…I used to train there and then they sent me to Pune for training. So there’s Gagan Narang Sports Foundation, Gun for Glory… I am training under it now… Gagan sir has supported me a lot and encouraged me for my game.
Modi ji :- Well, if all four of you want to say something to me, I would like to hear it. There should be Pragati, Amlan, Priyanka and Abhidanya. All of you are connected with me, so if you want to say something, I will definitely listen.
Amlan :- Sir, I have a question sir.
Modi ji :- Ji.
Amlan :- Which sport do you like best sir?
Modi ji :- India should bloom a lot in the world of sports and that is why I am promoting these things a lot, but hockey, football, kabaddi, kho-kho, these are games rooted to our land, in these, we should never lag behind. And I’m observing that our people, are doing well in archery, they are doing well in shooting. And secondly, I am seeing that our youth and even in our families also do not have that feeling towards sports which was there earlier. Earlier, when a child used to go to play, they used to stop, and now, times have changed and the success that you people have been achieving, motivates all the families. In every game, wherever our children are going, they return after accomplishing something or the other for the country. And such news is shown prominently in the country today…is also conveyed and also discussed in schools and colleges. Well! I felt very nice. Many many congratulations to all of you from my side. Many good wishes.
Young player :- Thank you very much! Thank you Sir! Thank you
Modi ji :- Thank you! Namaskar.
My family members, this time on 15th August, the country saw the power of ‘Sabka Prayas’. The efforts of all the countrymen turned the ‘Har Ghar Tiranga Abhiyan’ into a ‘Har Man Tiranga Abhiyan’. Many records were also made during this campaign. The countrymen purchased tricolors in crores. Around 1.5 crore tricolors were sold through 1.5 lakh post offices. Through that, our workers, weavers, and especially women have also earned hundreds of crores of rupees. This time the countrymen have created a new record in posting Selfie with the tricolor. Last year till August 15, about 5 crore countrymen had posted Selfiewith the tricolor. This year this number has also crossed 10 crores.
Friends, At present, the campaign to evoke the spirit of patriotism ‘Meri Mati, Mera Desh’ is in full swing in the country. In the month of September, there will be a campaign to collect soil from every house in every village of the country. The holy soil of the country will be deposited in thousands of Amrit Kalash urns. At the end of October, thousands will reach the country’s capital Delhi with the Amrit Kalash Yatra. Amrit Vatika will be built in Delhi from this soil only. I am sure, the efforts of every countryman will make this campaign successful.
My family members, this time I have received many letters in Sanskrit language. The reason for this is that the Poornima of the month of Sawan, World Sanskrit Day is celebrated.
Sarvebhyah Vishwa Sanskrit Disasasya Haardayaha Shubhkamanah
Many felicitations to all of you on World Sanskrit Day. We all know that Sanskrit is one of the oldest languages in the world. It is also called the mother of many modern languages. Sanskrit is known for its antiquity as well as its scientificity and grammar. Much ancient knowledge of India has been preserved in Sanskrit language for thousands of years. People doing research on subjects like Yoga, Ayurveda and philosophy are now learning Sanskrit more and more. Many institutes are also doing very good work in this direction. Such as Sanskrit Promotion foundation runs many courses like Sanskrit for Yog, Sanskrit for Ayurveda and Sanskrit for Buddhism. ‘Sanskrit Bharti’ runs a campaign to teach Sanskrit to people. In this you can participate in a 10 day ‘Sanskrit Conversation Camp’. I am happy that today awareness and pride in Sanskrit has increased among people. There is also a special contribution of the country in the past years behind this. For example, three Sanskrit Deemed Universities were made Central Universities in 2020. Many colleges and institutes of Sanskrit universities are also being run in different cities. Sanskrit centers are becoming very popular in institutes like IITs and IIMs.
Friends, you must have often experienced one thing, in order to connect with the roots, to connect with our culture, our tradition, there’s is a very powerful medium – our mother tongue. When we connect with our mother tongue, we naturally connect with our culture. We get connected with our Sanskars, we get connected with our tradition, we get connected with our ancient splendor. Similarly, India has another mother tongue, the glorious Telugu language. 29 August will be celebrated as Telugu Day.
Andariki Telugu Bhasha Dinotsava Shubhakankshalu |
Many many congratulations to all of you on Telugu Day. Many priceless gems of Indian culture are hidden in the literature and heritage of Telugu language. Many efforts are also being made to ensure that the whole country gets the benefit of this heritage of Telugu.
My family members, we have talked about tourism in many episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Seeing things or places in person, understanding and living them for a few moments, offers a different experience.
No matter how much someone describes the ocean, we cannot feel its vastness without seeing the ocean. No matter how much one talks about the Himalayas, we cannot assess its beauty without seeing the Himalayas. That’s why I often urge all of you that whenever we get a chance, we must go to see the beauty and diversity of our country. Often we also see one more thing…despite having searched every corner of the world, we are unaware of many best places and things in our own city or state.
Many times it happens that people do not know much about the historical places of their own city. Something similar happened with Dhanpal ji. Dhanapal ji used to work as a driver in the Transport Office of Bangalore. About 17 years ago, he was given a responsibility in the Sightseeing wing. Now people know it by the name of Bengaluru Darshini. Dhanpal ji used to take tourists to various tourist places of the city. On one such trip, a tourist asked him why the tank in Bangalore is called Senki Tank. He felt very bad that he did not know the answer. In such a situation, he focused on enhancing his own knowledge. In his passion to know his heritage, he found many stones and inscriptions. Dhanpal ji’s mind was so absorbed in this task that he also did a Diploma in epigraphy i.e. the subject related to inscriptions. Though he is now retired, his passion to explore the history of Bengaluru is still alive.
Friends, I am very happy to tell you about Brian D. Kharpran. He is a resident of Meghalaya and has a great interest in speleology. In simple language, it means – study of caves. Years ago, this interest arose in him when he read several story books. In 1964, he did his first exploration as a schoolboy. In 1990, he along with his friend established an association and through this he started to find out about the unknown caves of Meghalaya. Within no time, he along with his team discovered more than 1700 caves in Meghalaya and put the state on the World Cave Map. Some of the longest and deepest caves in India are present in Meghalaya. Brian Ji and his team have also documented the Cave Fauna ie those creatures of the cave, which are not found anywhere else in the world. I appreciate the efforts of this entire team, as well as I urge you to make a plan to visit the caves of Meghalaya.
My family members, you all know that the Dairy Sector is one of the most important sectors of our country. It has played a very important role in bringing a big change in the lives of our mothers and sisters. Just a few days ago, I came to know about an interesting initiative of Banas Dairy of Gujarat. Banas Dairy is considered to be the biggest Dairy in Asia. On an average, 75 lakh liters of milk is processed here everyday. After this it is also sent to other states. For the timely delivery of milk here to other states, until now the support of tankers or milk trains was availed of. But there were no less challenges in that too. Firstly, loading and unloading used to take a lot of time and often the milk also used to get spoilt. To overcome this problem, Indian Railways did a new experiment. Railways started a Truck-on-Track facility from Palanpur to New Rewari. In this, milk trucks are directly loaded onto the train. That is, the major problem of transportation has been overcome by this. The results of the Truck-on-Track facility have been very satisfactory. Earlier the milk which used to take 30 hours to reach is now reaching in less than half the time. Due to this, whereas the pollution caused by fuel has stopped, the cost of fuel is also saved. Drivers of trucks have also benefited a lot from this, their life has become easier.
Friends, with collective efforts today, our dairies are also moving forward with modern thinking. How Banas Dairy has also taken a step forward in the direction of environmental protection is evident through the Seedball tree plantation campaign. Varanasi Milk Union is working on manure management to increase the income of our dairy farmers. The effort of Malabar Milk Union Dairy of Kerala is also very unique. It is engaged in developing Ayurvedic Medicines for the treatment of animal diseases.
Friends, today there are many people who are diversifying by adopting dairy. You must also know about Amanpreet Singh, who is running a dairy farm in Kota, Rajasthan. Along with dairy, he also focused on Biogas and set up two biogas plants. Due to this, their expenditure on electricity has reduced by about 70 percent. This effort of his is going to inspire dairy farmers across the country. Today many big dairies are focusing on biogas. This type of Community Driven Value addition is very exciting. I am sure that such trends will continue throughout the country.
My family members, that’s all today in Mann Ki Baat. The season of festivals has also arrived. Happy Raksha Bandhan as well to all of you in advance. At the time of celebration, we also have to remember the mantra of Vocal for Local. This campaign of ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’ is the every countryman’s own campaign. And during the festive atmosphere, we have to keep holy places and their vicinity clean; albeit for all times. Next time we will again have ‘Mann Ki Baat’, shall meet with some new topics. We will discuss to our heart’s content, some of the new efforts of the countrymen and their success. Till then I take leave of you. Thank you very much.
Namaskar
My dear family members, Namaskar. In yet another episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I have got the opportunity to share with you all, the success of the country, the success of the countrymen; their inspiring life journey. These days, most of the letters and messages I have received are largely on two subjects. The first is the successful landing of Chandrayaan-3 and the second topic is the successful hosting of G-20 in Delhi. I have received countless letters from every part of the country, across every section of the society, and people of all ages. When the lander of Chandrayaan-3 was about to land on the Moon, crores of people were simultaneously witnessing each and every moment of this event through different mediums. More than 80 lakh people watched this incident on ISRO’s YouTube Live Channel; which is a record in itself. This conveys how deep the attachment of crores of Indians is to Chandrayaan-3. On this success of Chandrayaan, a wonderful quiz competition is going on in the country these days… and it has been named – ‘Chandrayaan-3 Mahaquiz’. So far, more than 15 lakh people have participated in this competition being held on MyGov portal. This is the largest participation in any quiz after the launch of MyGov. I would also suggest that if you have not yet participated in it, do not delay, there are still six more days left. Do take part in this quiz.
My family members, after the success of Chandrayaan-3, the grand hosting of G-20 doubled the joy of every Indian. Bharat Mandapam has turned out tobe a celebrity in itself. People are taking selfies with it and also posting them with pride. In this summit, India has proved the mettle of her leadership by making African Union a full member of G-20. You must be aware that duringthe time when India was very prosperous, the Silk Route was a part of discourse in our country and in the world. This Silk Route was a major medium of business and trade. Now in modern times, India has suggested another Economic Corridor in G-20. This is the India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor. This corridor is going to become the basis of world trade for hundreds of years to come, and history will always remember that this corridor was initiated on Indian soil.
Friends, today a special mention is required on the way India’s youth power associated itself with this event during the G-20. Throughout the year, programs related to G-20 were held in many universities of the country. In this series now, another exciting program is going to happen in Delhi – the ‘G20 University Connect Programme’. Through this programme, lakhs of university students across the country will connect with each other. Many prestigious institutions like IITs, IIMs, NITs and Medical Colleges will also participate in it. I wish that if you are a college student, you must watch this program to be held on the 26th September and join it. In this, many interesting exchanges are going to take place on the future of India and on the future of the youth. I myself shall participate in this program. I am also waiting to communicate with our college students.
My family members, two days from now, the 27th September, is ‘World Tourism Day’. Some people view tourism just as a means of touring and travelling, but a very big aspect of tourism is related to employment. It is said that if any sector generates maximum employment with minimum investment, it is the tourism sector. In enhancing the tourism sector, goodwill and attraction towards any country matter a lot. The fascination towards India has risen a lot in the last few years and after the successful organization of G-20, the interest of the people of the world towards India has grown further.
Friends, more than one lakh delegates came to India for G-20. They got acquainted with the diversity here; different traditions, different types of cuisines and our heritage. The wonderful experiences that the delegates who came here have carried back with them will further expand tourism. You all know that there are world heritage sites in India and their number is continuously rising. Just a few days ago, Shantiniketan and the holy Hoysala temples of Karnataka have been declared world heritage sites. I congratulate all the countrymen for this wonderful achievement. I had the privilege of visiting Shanti Niketan in 2018. Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore had been associated with Shanti Niketan. Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore had derived the motto of Shantiniketan from an ancient Sanskrit verse. That verse is –
“YatraVishwamBhavatyekNeedam”
That is, where a small nest can contain the entire world.
The Hoysala temples of Karnataka, which have been included in the UNESCO World Heritage List, are known for their excellent architecture of the 13th century. These temples getting recognition from UNESCO is also an honor to the Indian tradition of temple building. The total number of World Heritage Properties in India has now reached 42. It is India’s endeavorto ensure as many of our historical and cultural places as possible get recognized as World Heritage Sites. I urge all of you … whenever you plan to travel somewhere, try to observe the diversity of India. Understand the culture of different states. Visit Heritage Sites. With this, not only will you become familiar with the glorious history of our country; you will also become an important medium to increase the income of the local people.
My family members, Indian culture and music have now become global. The fascination of people all over the world towards them is increasing day by day. I am playing you a short audio of a presentation made by a lovely daughter…
####Audio-Song
You were also surprised to listen to  this, weren’t you? What a sweet voice… and through the emotions reflected in every word, we can feel her love for God. If I disclose that this melodious voice belongs to a daughter from Germany, perhaps you will be even more surprised!The name of this daughter is – Kasmi. 21 year old Kasmi is quite popular on Instagram these days. Kasmi, a resident of Germany, has never been to India, but she is a fan of Indian music, who has never even seen India. Her interest in Indian music is very inspiring. Kasmi has been blind since birth, but this difficult challenge did not stop her from extraordinary achievements. Her passion for music and creativity was such that she started singing right from her childhood. She started African Drumming at the age of just 3 years. She was introduced to Indian music just 5-6 years ago. The music of India fascinated her so much that she got completely engrossed in it. She has also learned to play the tabla. The most inspiring thing is that she has mastered singing in many Indian languages. Sanskrit, Hindi, Malayalam, Tamil, Kannada or Assamese, Bengali, Marathi, Urdu, she has mastered her notes in all of them. You can imagine how difficult it is if someone has to speak two-three lines of another unknown language, but for Kasmi it is like child’s play. For all of you, I am sharing here one of her songs sung in Kannada.
###Audio – Song
I wholeheartedly appreciate Germany’s Kasmi’s passion for Indian culture and music. Her efforts are going to overwhelm every Indian.
My dear family members, in our country education is always seen as a service. I have come to know about some youth of Uttarakhand, who are working for the education of children with the same spirit. Some youth in Nainital district have started unique‘Ghoda Library’ for children. The biggest feature of this library is that books are reaching children even in the most remote areas and not only this, the service is absolutely free. Till now 12 villages of Nainital have been covered through this. Local people are also coming forward to help in this noble cause related to children’s education. Through this Ghoda Library, an effort is being made that the children living in remote villages get full opportunity to read ‘poems’, ‘stories’ and ‘moral education’ books apart from school books. This unique library is also much liked by the children.
Friends, I have come to know a similar unique effort related to libraries in Hyderabad. Here, daughter Akarshana Satish studying in seventh class has done wonders. You may be surprised to know that at just 11 years of age, she is running not one or two, but seven libraries for children. Akarshana got her inspiration two years ago when she went to a cancer hospital with her parents. Her father had gone there to help the needy. The children there asked her for ‘Colouring Books’, and this very thing touched this lovely doll so much that she decided to collect different types of books. She started collecting books from herneighbourhood, relatives and friends and you will be happy to know that the first library was opened for children in the same cancer hospital. Around 6 thousand books are now available in the seven libraries that this daughter has opened so far at different places for needy children. The way little Akarshna is doing a great job in shaping the future of children, is inspiring everyone.
Friends, it is true that today’s era is of Digital Technology and E-Books, but still books always play the role of a good friend in our lives. Hence, we should motivate children to read books.
My family members, it has been said in our scriptures –
JeeveshuKarunaChapi, MaitriTeshuVidhiyatam.
That is, have compassion on living beings and make them your friends. Most of our deities’ carriers are animals and birds. Many people visit temples to have darshan of God, but they do not pay much attention to the animals that transport them. These creatures should not only remain at the centre of our faith, we should also protect them in every possible way. During the last few years, in the country, a commendable rise has been observed in the numbers of lions, tigers, leopards and elephants. Many other efforts are also going on continuously to save other animals living on this earth. A similar unique effort is also being undertaken in Pushkar, Rajasthan. Here, Sukhdev Bhatt ji and his team are working together to save wild animals, and do you know what the name of their team is? His team’s name is – Cobra. This dangerous name is because his team also works to rescue deadly snakes in this area. A large number of people are involved in this team, who reach the spot on just a call and get involved in their mission. Sukhdevji has till now saved the lives of more than 30 thousand venomous snakes. Through this effort, whereas this has reduced the danger to the people; nature is also being conserved. This team is also involved in the service ofailing animals.
Friends, Auto Driver M. Rajendra Prasad ji is also doing a unique work in Chennai, Tamil Nadu. He has been engaged in the service of pigeons for the last 25-30 years. He himself has more than 200 pigeons in his house. There itself, he takes full care of every need of the birds like food, water, health etc. He spends quite a lot of money on this, but he is steadfast in his work. Friends, seeing people doing such work with good intentions really gives a lot of satisfaction and a lot of joy. If you also get information about some such unique efforts, do share it.
My dear family members, this AzadiKaAmritKaal is also the period of duty for every citizen of the country. Only by performing our duties can we achieve our goals and reach our destination. The sense of duty binds us all together. In Sambhal UP, the country has seen such an example of sense of duty, which I want to share with you too. Just imagine…more than 70 villages, population of thousands and all the people coming together and uniting to achieve one goal…this rarely happens, but the people of Sambhalhave done it. Together, these people have set a wonderful example of public participation and collective effort. Actually, decades ago, there used to be a river named ‘Sot’ in this area. Originating from Amroha and flowing through Sambhal to Badaun, this river was once known as the life giver in this region. Water used to flow continuously in this river, which was the main basis of farming for the farmers here. With time the flow of the river reduced, the paths through which the river flowed were encroached upon and this river became extinct. In our country, which considers the river as a Mother, the people of Sambhal have resolved to bring back to life Sotriver also. In December last year, more than 70 Gram Panchayats together started the work of rejuvenation of the Sot river. The people of Gram Panchayats also took government departments along with them. You will be happy to know that in just the first six months of the year itself, these people had restored more than a 100 kilometres of the river. When the rainy season started, the hard work of the people here bore fruit and the Sot river was filled to the brim with water. This has come as a huge occasion of happiness for the farmers here. People have also planted more than 10 thousand bamboo saplingson the banks of the river, so that her banks remain completely safe. More than thirty thousand Gambusia fish have also been released in the river water so that mosquitoes do not breed. Friends, the example of the Sot river tells us that if we are determined, we can overcome the biggest challenges and bring about a big change. By walking on the path of duty, you too can become the medium of many such changes around you.
My family members, when intentions are firm and there is a passion to learn something, no work remains difficult. SmtShakuntalaSardar of West Bengal has proved this to be absolutely correct. Today she has become an inspiration for many other women. Shakuntalaji is a resident of Shatanala village of Jangal Mahal. For a long time, her family used to earn their livelihood by working as laborers every day. Sheer survival was difficult for her family. Then she decided to tread upon a new path and surprised everyone by achieving success. You would definitely like to know how she achieved this feat! The answer is – a sewing machine. Using a sewing machine, she started making beautiful designs on ‘Sal’ leaves. This skill of hers transformed the life of the entire family. The demand for this amazing craft made by her is ever rising. This skill of Shakuntalaji has changed not only her life but also the lives of many people who collect ‘Sal’ leaves. Now, she is also working on imparting training to many women. Imagine… a family, which was once dependent on labour wages, is now inspiring others to gain employment. She has put her family, which was dependent on daily wages, stand on their feet. This has given her family the opportunity to focus on other things as well. Something more has happened…As soon as Shakuntalaji’s condition got better, she also started saving. Now she has started investing in life insurance plans, for a brighter future of her children. No amount of appreciation forShakuntalaji’sspiritwould be enough. The people of India are full of such talent – give them an opportunity and see what wonders they perform!
Friends, who can forget that sight during the G-20 Summit in Delhi, when many world leaders reached Rajghat together to pay homage to Bapu. This is a big evidence of how relevant Bapu’s thoughts are even today across the world. I am also happy that many programs related to cleanliness have been planned across the country on the occasion of Gandhi Jayanti. The ‘Swachhta Hi SevaAbhiyaan’ is going on with great enthusiasm in all the offices of the Central Government. Significant participation is also being seen in the IndianSwachhata League. Today I also want to urge all the countrymen through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ – a big event on cleanliness is going to be organized on the 1st of October i.e. Sunday at 10 am. You too should take out time and help in this campaign related to cleanliness. You can also join this cleanliness campaign in your street, or neighbourhood…or at a park, river, lake or any other public place and cleanliness must be undertaken wherever an AmritSarovar has been built. This Karyanjali of cleanliness itself will be the true tribute to Gandhiji. I would like to remind you again that on this occasion of Gandhi Jayanti, make it a point to buy some Khadi product.
My family members, the festive season has also commenced in our country. All of you might also be planning to buy something new in the household. One would be waiting to start an auspicious work or two during Navratri. In this atmosphere of fervour and enthusiasm, you must also remember the mantra of Vocal for Local. As far as possible, you should buy goods made in India, use Indian products and gift only Made in India goods. Your little joy will become the cause of immense happiness for someone else’s family. Whatever Indian goods you buy, our laborers, workers, craftspersons and other Vishwakarma brothers and sisters will directly benefit from it. Nowadays, many start-ups are also promoting local products. If you buy local articles, these youth with their start-ups will also benefit.
My dear family members
That’s all for today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Next time when I will meet you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, Navratri and Dussehra would have been over. In this festive season, may you also celebrate every festival with full enthusiasm… may there be happiness in your family – this is my wish. A lot of best wishes to you on these festivals. I shall meet you again, with newer themes, with new success stories of the countrymen. Keep sending me your messages; do not forget to share your experiences. I shall wait.
Thank you very much.
Namaskar
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Welcome once again to Mann Ki Baat. This episode is taking place at a time when the entire country is enveloped in the fervour of festivities. Heartiest greetings to all of you on the occasion of the festivals.
Friends, amid the zeal of the festivities, I wish to commence Mann Ki Baat with a news from Delhi itself. At the beginning of this month, on the occasion of Gandhi Jayanti, Khadi witnessed record sales in Delhi. Here at Connaught Place, at a single Khadi store, in a single day, people purchased goods worth over a crore and a half rupees. The ongoing Khadi Mahotsav this month has broken all its previous sales records. You will be pleased to know of another fact that earlier in the country, whereas the sale of Khadi products could barely touch thirty thousand crore rupees; now this is rising to reach almost 1.25 lakh crore rupees. The rise in the sale of Khadi means its benefit reaches myriad sections across cities and villages. Benefiting from these sales are our weavers, handicraft artisans, our farmers, cottage industries engaged in growing Ayurvedic plants, everyone is getting the benefit of this sale… and, this is the strength of the ‘Vocal for Local’ campaign… gradually the support of all you countrymen is increasing.
Friends, today I would like to reiterate one more request to you, and insistently at that! Whenever you travel for tourism; go on a pilgrimage, do buy products made by the local artisans there.
In the overall budget of your travel itinerary, do include purchasing local products as an important priority. Be it ten percent, twenty percent, as much as your budget allows, you should spend it on local and spend it only there.
Friends, like every time, this time too, in our festivals, our priority should be ‘Vocal for Local’ and let us together fulfill that dream; our dream is ‘Aatmnirbhar Bharat’. This time, let us illuminate homes only with a product which radiates the fragrance of the sweat of one of my countrymen, the talent of a youth of my country… which has provided employment to my countrymen in its making. Whatever be our daily life’s requirements, we shall buy local. But you will have to focus on one more thing, this spirit for Vocal for Local, is not limited only to festival shopping and somewhere I have seen, people buy Diwali diyas and then post ‘Vocal for Local’ on social media – No… not at all, this is just the beginning. We have to move ahead a lot, in our country. Now every necessity of life… everything is available. This vision is not limited to just buying goods from small shopkeepers and street vendors. Today India is becoming the world’s biggest manufacturing hub. Many big brands are manufacturing their products here. If we adopt those products, then Make In India gets a fillip and this too is being ‘Vocal For Local’, and Yes, while buying such products, try to insist on the pride of our country, the UPI digital payment system. Make it a habit in life, and share a selfie with that product, or with that artisan, with me on Namo App and that too through a made in India smartphone. I will share some of those posts on Social Media so that other people can also be inspired to be ‘Vocal for Local’.
Friends, when you brighten up your Diwali with products Made In India, Made by Indians; fulfill every little need of your family locally, the sparkle of Diwali will only increase, but in the lives of those artisans, a new Diwali will shine, a dawn of life will rise, their life will become wonderful. Make India self-reliant, keep choosing ‘Make in India’, so that the Diwali of crores of countrymen along with you becomes wonderful, lively, radiant and interesting.
My dear countrymen, 31st October is a very special day for all of us. On this day we celebrate the birth anniversary of our Iron Man Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. We Indians remember him, for many reasons and pay our respects. The biggest reason is – his incomparable role in integrating more than 580 princely states of the country. We know that every year on the 31st of October, the main function related to Unity Day takes place at the Statue of Unity in Gujarat. Apart from this, a very special program is being organized on Kartavya Path. You might remember that recently I had urged you to collect soil from every village, every house in the country. After collecting soil from every house, it was placed in a Kalash and then Amrit Kalash Yatras were organized. This soil collected from every corner of the country, these thousands of Amrit Kalash Yatras are now reaching Delhi. Here in Delhi, that soil will be put in an enormous Bharat Kalash and with this sacred soil, ‘Amrit Vatika’ will be built in Delhi. It will remain as a grand legacy of the Amrit Mahotsav in the heart of the country’s capital. The Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, which has been going on for the last two and a half years across the country, will conclude on the 31st of October. All of you together have made it one of the longest running festivals in the world. Be it honouring our freedom fighters or Har Ghar Tiranga, in the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, people have lent a new identity to their local history. During this period, wonderful examples of community service have also been observed.
Friends, today I am sharing with you another good news, especially to my young sons and daughters, who have the passion, dreams and resolve to do something for the country. This good news is not only for the countrymen, but it is special for you, my young friends. Just two days later, on the 31st of October, the foundation of a very big nationwide organization is being laid and that too on the birth anniversary of Sardar Sahib. The name of this organization is – Mera Yuva Bharat, i.e. My Bharat. My Bharat Organization will provide an opportunity to the youth of India to play an active role in various nation building events. This is a unique effort of integrating the youth power of India in building a developed India.
Mera Yuva Bharat’s website My Bharat is also about to be launched. I would urge the youth – I would urge them again and again that all of you Youth of my country, all you sons and daughters of my country, register on MyBharat.gov.in and sign up for various programs. The 31st of October is also the death anniversary of former Prime Minister Smt Indira Gandhi Ji. I also pay my heartfelt tribute to her.
My family members, our literature is one of the best mediums to deepen the sentiment of the spirit of Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat. I would like to share with you two very inspiring endeavours related to the glorious heritage of Tamil Nadu. I have got the opportunity to know about the famous Tamil writer Sister ShivaShankari Ji. She has done a project – Knit India, through literature. It means – to knit over a common thread and connect the country through literature. She has been working on this project for the last 16 years. Through this project she has translated literature written in 18 Indian languages. She travelled across the country several times, from Kanyakumari to Kashmir and from Imphal to Jaisalmer, so that she could interview writers and poets from different states. Shiv Shankari Ji travelled to different places and published the accounts along with travel commentaries. This is in both Tamil and English languages. There are four big volumes in this project and each volume is dedicated to a different part of India. I am proud of the strength of her resolve.
Friends, the work of Thiru A. K. Perumal Ji of Kanyakumari is also very inspiring. He has done a commendable job of preserving the story telling tradition of Tamil Nadu. He has been engaged in this mission for the last 40 years. For this, he travels to different parts of Tamil Nadu, discovers the folk art forms and makes them a part of his book. You will be surprised to know that till now he has written around a 100 such books. Apart from this, Perumal Ji also has another passion. He likes to research on the Temple culture of Tamil Nadu. He has also done a lot of research on leather puppets, which is benefitting the local folk artists there. Shiv Shankari Ji and A.K. Perumal Ji’s efforts are exemplary to everyone. India is proud of every such effort to preserve her culture, which not only strengthens our national unity but also enhances the glory of the country, the honour of the country… infact, everything.
My family members, the entire country will celebrate the ‘Janjaatiya Gaurav Diwas’ on the 15th of November. This special day is associated with the birth anniversary of Bhagwan Birsa Munda. Bhagwan Birsa Munda dwells in the hearts of all of us. We can learn from his life what true courage is and what it means to stand firm on one’s resolve. He never accepted foreign rule. He envisioned a society where there was no room for injustice. He wanted that every person should be entitled to a life of dignity and equality. Bhagwan Birsa Munda always emphasized on living in harmony with nature. Even today we can say that our tribal brothers and sisters are dedicated in every way to the care and conservation of nature. For all of us, these endeavours of our Adivasi brothers and sisters is a great inspiration.
Friends, tomorrow i.e. the 30th of October is also the death anniversary of Govind Guru Ji. Govind Guru Ji has had a very special significance in the lives of the tribal and deprived communities of Gujarat and Rajasthan. I also pay my tribute to Govind Guru Ji. In the month of November we solemnly observe the anniversary of the Mangadh massacre. I salute all the children of Ma Bharati who were martyred in that massacre.
Friends, India has a rich history of tribal warriors. It was on this very land of India that the great Tilka Manjhi sounded the trumpet against injustice. From this very land Sidhho – Kanhu raised the voice for equality. We are proud that the warrior Tantiya Bheel was born on our soil. We remember Shaheed Veer Narayan Singh with full reverence, who stood by his people in difficult circumstances.
Be it Veer RamJi Gond, Veer Gundadhur, Bheema Nayak, their courage still inspires us. The country still remembers the spirit that Alluri Sitaram Raju instilled in the tribal brothers and sisters. We also get a lot of inspiration from freedom fighters like Kiang Nobang and Rani Gaidinliu in the North East. It is from the tribal community that the country got women brave hearts like RajMohini Devi and Rani Kamlapati. The country is currently celebrating the 500th Birth Anniversary of Rani Durgavati Ji, who inspired the tribal society. I hope that more and more youth of the country will know about the tribal personalities of their region and derive inspiration from them. The country is grateful to its tribal society, which has always held the self-respect and upliftment of the nation paramount.
My dear countrymen, during this festive season, at this time in the country, the flag of sports is also flying high. Recently, after the Asian Games, Indian Players also achieved tremendous success in the Para Asian Games. India has created a new history by winning 111 medals in these games. I congratulate all the athletes participating in the Para Asian Games.
Friends, I wish to draw your attention to the Special Olympics World Summer Games, as well. It was organized in Berlin. This competition is a wonderful opportunity for our athletes with intellectual disabilities, to display their capabilities. In this competition, the Indian Team won 200 medals including 75 Gold Medals. Be it Roller Skating, Beach Volleyball, Football or Lawn Tennis, Indian players won a flurry of medals. The life journey of these medal winners has been quite inspiring. Haryana’s Ranveer Saini has won the Gold Medal in Golf. For Ranveer, who has been suffering from autism since childhood, no challenge could reduce his passion for Golf. His mother even says that everyone in the family has now become a golfer. 16 year old T-Vishal from Puducherry won 4 medals. Siya Sarode of Goa won 4 medals including 2 Gold Medals in power lifting. Even after losing her mother at the age of 9, she did not let herself get discouraged. Anurag Prasad, resident of Durg Chhattisgarh, has won 3 Gold and 1 Silver medal in power lifting. Another such inspiring story is that of Indu Prakash of Jharkhand, who has won 2 medals in cycling. Despite being from a very ordinary family, Indu never let poverty become an obstacle in the path of her success. I am confident that the success of Indian players in these games will also inspire other children with intellectual disabilities and their families. I also urge you all to go with your family and visit such children in your village, or in the neighbourhood, who have taken part in these games or have emerged victorious. Congratulate them. And spend some moments with those children. You will undergo a new experience. God has instilled within them a certain strength that you will also get a chance to observe and feel. Do visit.
My family members, all of you must have certainly heard of the pilgrimage site in Gujarat, Amba Ji Mandir. This is an important Shakti Peeth, where a large number of devotees from India and abroad arrive to have a Darshan of Ma Ambe. Here on the way to Gabbar Parvat, you will be able to see sculptures of various Yoga postures and Asanas. Do you know what is special about these statues? Actually these are sculptures made from scrap; in a way, made of junk and which are very amazing. That means these statues have been made from used items that have been thrown away as scrap. Along with the darshan of Mother Goddess at Amba Ji Shakti Peeth, these statues have also become the center of attraction for the devotees. Looking at the success of this effort, a suggestion is also coming to my mind. There are many people in our country who can make such artefacts from waste. I request the Gujarat government to start a competition and invite such people. This endeavour, along with enhancing the attraction value of Gabbar Parvat, will also inspire people for the ‘Waste to Wealth’ campaign across the country.
Friends, whenever it comes to Swachh Bharat and ‘Waste To Wealth’, we see countless examples from every corner of the country. A school named Akshar Forum in Kamrup Metropolitan District of Assam is relentlessly performing the task of inculcating Sanskar & values and values of sustainable development in children. The students studying here collect plastic waste every week, which is used in making items like eco-friendly bricks and key chains. Here students are also taught to make products from recycling and plastic waste. This awareness towards the environment at an early age will go a long way in making these children dutiful citizens of the country.
My family members, today there is no area of life where we are not able to see the capacity potential of woman power. In this era, when their achievements are being appreciated everywhere, we also have to remember a woman saint who showed the power of Bhakti, whose name is recorded in the golden annals of history. This year the country is celebrating the 525th birth anniversary of the great saint Mirabai. She has been an inspiring force for people across the country for many reasons. If someone is interested in music, she is a great example of dedication towards music; if someone is a lover of poetry, Meerabai’s bhajans, immersed in devotion, give one an entirely different joy; if someone believes in divine power, Mirabai’s rapt absorption in Shri Krishna can become a great inspiration for that person. Mirabai considered Saint Ravidas as her guru. She also used to say-
Guru Miliya Raidas, Dinhi Gyan ki Gutki.
Mirabai is still a source of inspiration for the mothers, sisters and daughters of the country. Even during that period, she listened to her inner voice and stood against conservative notions. Even as a saint, she inspires us all. She came forward to strengthen Indian society and culture when the country was facing many types of invasions. We come to know from the lifetime of Mirabai how much strength there is in simplicity and modesty. I bow to Sant Mirabai.
My dear family members, that’s all this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Every interaction with all of you fills me up with new energy. Hundreds of stories related to hope and positivity keep reaching me in your messages. I again urge you to emphasize on Aatma Nirbhar Bharat campaign. Buy local products, be Vocal for Local. Just as you keep your houses clean, keep your locality and city clean. And you know, on the 31st of October, the birth anniversary of Sardar Saheb, the country celebrates it as Unity Day; Run for Unity programs are organized at many places in the country. You too should organize the Run for Unity Programs on the 31st of October. You should also join in large numbers and strengthen the resolve of unity. Once again, I extend many best wishes for the upcoming festivals. I wish you all celebrate with joy, with your family; stay healthy, stay happy. And yes, at the time of Diwali, no such mistake should be made that any incidents of fire may occur. If someone’s life is in danger then you must take care; take care of yourself, and also take care of the entire area.
Many best wishes.
Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar, Welcome to Mann Ki Baat. But, we can never forget this day, the 26th of November. It was on this very day that the country had come under the most dastardly terror attack. Terrorists had made Mumbai shudder… along with the entire country. But it is India’s fortitude that made us surmount the ordeal; we are now quelling terror with full ardor. I pay homage to all of them who lost their lives in the Mumbai attack. Today, the country is in remembrance of those brave hearts who made the supreme sacrifice during the attack.
My family members, this day, the 26th of November is extremely significant on one more account. It was on this very day in 1949 that the Constituent Assembly had passed and adopted the Constitution of India. I remember… in the year 2015, when we were celebrating the 125th birth anniversary of BabasahebAmbedkar, a thought had struck the mind to observe the 26th of November as Constitution Day. And since then, every year, we have been celebrating this day as Constitution Day. I extend my best wishes to all countrymen on the occasion of Constitution Day. And together we shall certainly attain the resolve of a developed India, according priority to citizens’ duties.
Friends, all of us know that the Constitution took 2 years 11 months and 18 days for coming into being. The oldest member in the Constituent Assembly was Shri Sachidananda Sinha Ji. The Draft of our Constitution came up after close study of the Constitution of over 60 countries; after long deliberations. After readying the Draft, before the final structure shaped up, over 2000 Amendments were re incorporated in it. Even after the Constitution came into force in 1950, till this day, a total of 106 Amendments have been carried out in the Constitution. In consonance with the times, circumstances and requirements of the country, various Governments carried out Amendments at different times. But this too has been a misfortune that the Constitution’s first Amendment pertained to curtailing the Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Expression. Whereas, through the 44th Amendment, the wrongs committed during the Emergency had been duly rectified.
Friends, it’s again inspiring that out of the same members of the Constituent Assembly who were nominated, 15 were Women. One such Member was Hansa Mehta Ji, who raised her voice for the sake of rights and justice to women. During that period, India was one of the countries whose Constitution enabled Voting Rights to women. In the process of nation building, collective development is possible only with support from everyone. It’s a matter of inner satisfaction for me that in adherence to the farsightedness of the framers of the Constitution, the Parliament of India has now passed the Nari Shakti Vandan Act. The Nari Shakti VandanAdhiniyam is an example of the Sankalp Shakti, the strength of the resolve of the Democracy. This will provide a fillip to the pace of accomplishing our resolve of a developed India.
My family members, when the people at large take charge of nation building, no power in the world can stop that country from moving forward. Today, it is clearly visible in India that many transformations are being led by the 140 crore people of the country. We have seen a direct example of this during this festive season. Last month in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I had laid emphasis on ‘Vocal for Local’ i.e. buying local products. Within the last few days, business worth more than Rs. 4 lakh crore has been done in the country on Diwali, BhaiyaDooj and Chhath. And during this period, tremendous enthusiasm was seen among the people in buying products Made in India. Now even our children, while buying something at the shop, have started checking whether Made in India is mentioned on them or not. Not only that, nowadays, people do not forget to check the Country of Origin while purchasing goods online.
Friends, just as the very success of ‘Swachh Bharat Abhiyan’ is becoming its inspiration; the success of ‘Vocal For Local’ is opening the doors to a ‘Developed India – Prosperous India’. This campaign of ‘Vocal For Local’ strengthens the economy of the entire country. The Vocal For Local campaign is a guarantee of employment. This is a guarantee of development; this is the guarantee of balanced development of the country. This provides equal opportunities to both urban and rural people. This also paves the way for Value Addition in local products, and if ever, there are ups and downs in the global economy, the mantra of Vocal For Local also protects our economy.
Friends, this sentiment towards Indian products should not be limited to festivals only. The wedding season as wellhas commenced now. Some trade organizations estimate that there could be a business of around Rs 5 lakh croreduring this wedding season. While shopping for weddings, all of you should give importance to products made in India only. And yes, since the topic of marriage has come up, one thing has been troubling me off and onfor a long time… and if I don’t open up my heart’s pain to my family members, who else do I do it with? Just ponder… these days a new milieu is being created by some families to go abroad and conduct weddings. Is this at all necessary? If we celebrate the festivities of marriages on Indian soil, amid the people of India, the country’s money will remain in the country. The people of the country will get an opportunity to render some service or the other at your wedding… even poor people will tell their children about that occasion. Can you extrapolate on this mission of ‘Vocal for Local’? Why don’t we hold such wedding ceremonies in our own country? It is possible that the kind of system you want may not be there today, but if we organize such events, systems will also develop. This is a topic related to very big families. I hope this pain of mine will definitely reach those big families.
My family members, another big trend has been seen during this festive season. This is the second consecutive year when the trend of buying some goods through cash payments on the occasion of Deepawali is gradually on the decline. That means, people are making more and more digital payments now. This is also very encouraging. You can do one more thing. Decide for yourself that for one month you will make payments only through UPI or any digital medium and not through cash. The success of the digital revolution in India has made this absolutely possible. And when one month is over, please share your experiences and your photos with me. I wish you all the best in advance from now itself.
My family members, our young friends have given another significant good news to the country, which is going to swell all of us with pride. ‘Intelligence, Idea and Innovation’is the hallmark of Indian youth today. A continuous rise in their intellectual properties through the combination of technology – this in itself is an important facet of progress in enhancing the capability of the country. You will be pleased to know that there has been an increase of more than 31 percent in patent applications by Indians in 2022. The World Intellectual Property Organization has released a very interesting report. This report shows that this has never happened earlier even in the top 10 countries that are at the forefront in filing patents. I congratulate my young colleagues for this wonderful achievement. I want to assure my young friends that the country is with you at every step. After the administrative and legal reforms made by the government, today our youth are engaged in innovation on a large scale with renewed energy. If compared with the figures of 10 years ago… today, our patents are getting 10 times more approvals. We all know that patents not only increase the Intellectual Property of the country; they also open doors to newer opportunities. Not only that, it also enhances the strength and potential of our start-ups. Today the spirit of innovation is being promoted among our school children as well. Atal Tinkering Lab, Atal Innovation Mission, Incubation Centres in colleges, Start-Up India campaign… the results of such relentless efforts are in front of the countrymen. This too, is a direct example of India’s youth power; India’s innovative power. Moving ahead with this fervour, we shall achieve the vision of a developed India and that is why I say again and again, ‘Jai Jawan-Jai Kisan’, ‘Jai Vigyan-Jai Anusandhan’.
My dear countrymen, you might remember that some time ago in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I had discussed about the large number of fairs being organized in India. Then the idea of a competition also came to mind in which people would share photos related to fairs. The Ministry of Culture had organized a Mela Moments Contest in connection with the same. You wouldbe pleased to know that thousands of people participated in it and many people also won prizes. Rajesh Dharji, resident of Kolkata, won the award for his amazing photo of a balloon and toy seller at CharakMela. This fair is very popular in rural Bengal. Anupam Singh ji received the Mela Portraits Award for showcasing Holi at Varanasi. Arun Kumar Nalimelaji was awarded for showing an attractive aspect related to ‘KulasaiDussehra’. Similarly, a photo showing the devotion of Pandharpur was included in the most liked photo, which was sent by a gentleman from Maharashtra, Shriman Rahul ji. In this competition, there were many pictures of local dishes visible during the fairs. In this, the picture by AlokAvinash ji, resident of Purulia, won an award. He had showcased the food of rural areas of Bengal during a fair. A picture by PranabBasaakji, in which women are enjoying Qulfi during the Bhagoriya festival, was also awarded. Rumelaji had sent a photo of women tasting Bhajiya in a village fair in Jagdalpur, Chhattisgarh – that was also awarded.
Friends, through ‘Mann Ki Baat’, today I request every village, every school, everypanchayat to organize such competitions regularly. Nowadays, the power of social media is immense… technology and the mobile have reached every home. Be it your local festivals or products, you can make them global through them as well.
Friends, just like the fairs held in every village, various dances here also possess their own heritage. There is a very famous dance in the tribal areas of Jharkhand, Odisha and Bengal which is called ‘Chhau’. ‘Chhau’ festival was organized in Srinagar from 15 to 17 November with the spirit of ‘Ek Bharat Shreshtha Bharat’. Everyone enjoyed the ‘Chhau’ dance in this program. A workshop was also organized to impart training in ‘Chhau’ dance to the youth of Srinagar. Similarly, ‘BasohliUtsav’ was organized in Kathua district a few weeks ago. This place is a 150 kilometers away from Jammu. Local art, folk dance and traditional Ramlila were organized in this festival.
Friends, the beauty of Indian culture was felt in Saudi Arabia also. This month, an event named ‘Sanskrit Utsav’ was held in Saudi Arabia. This was unique in itself, since the entire program was in Sanskrit. Dialogues, music, dance, everything in Sanskrit, in which the participation of the local people was also seen.
My family members, ‘Swachh Bharat’ has now become a favorite topic of the entire country. It of course is my favorite topic as well and as soon as I receive any news related to it, my mind veers towards it… and it is naturalfor it to certainly find a mention in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The Swachh Bharat Abhiyan has changed people’s mindset regarding cleanliness and public hygiene. Today this initiative has become a symbol of the national spirit, which has improved the lives of crores of countrymen. This campaign has also inspired people from different walks of life, especially the youth, for collective participation. One such commendable effort has been observed in Surat. A team of youth has started ‘Project Surat’ there. Its aim is to make Surat a model city which becomes an excellent example of cleanliness and sustainable development. Under this effort, which commenced as ‘Safai Sunday’, the youth of Suratearlier used to clean public places and the Dumas Beach. Later, these people also got involved wholeheartedly in cleaning the banks of the Tapiriver. And you will be happy to know that within no time the number of people associated with this has risen to more than 50 thousand. The confidence of the team increased with the support received from the people, after which they also embarked upon the task of collecting garbage. You will be surprised to know that this team has cleared lakhs of kilos of garbage. Such efforts made at the grassroots level can bring huge changes.
Friends, another piece of information has come in from Gujarat itself. A few weeks ago, ‘BhadaraviPoonam Fair’ was organized atAmbaji.More than 50 lakh people came to this fair. This fair takes place every year. The most significant aspect about it was that the people who came to the fair conducted a cleanliness campaign across a large part of Gabbar Hill. This campaign to keep the entire area around the temples clean is very inspiring.
Friends, I always say that cleanliness is not a campaign for a day or a week but it is an endeavor to be implemented for life. We also see people around us who have devoted their entire lives to issues related to cleanliness. Loganathanji, who lives in Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, is incomparable. During his childhood, he often used to getperturbedon seeing the torn clothes of poor children. After that, he took a vow to help such children and started donating a part of his earnings to them. When there was shortage of money, Loganathanji even cleaned toilets so that the needy children could be helped. He has been engaged in this task with complete dedication for the last 25 years and till now has helped more than 1500 children. I once again commend such efforts. Many such efforts taking place across the country not only inspire us but also ignite the will to do something new.
My family members, one of the biggest challenges of the 21st century is ‘Water Security’. Conserving water is no less than saving life. When we perform any work with this spirit of collectivity, we also achieve success. An example of this is the ‘AmritSarovar’ being built in every district of the country. The more than 65 thousand ‘AmritSarovars’ that India has developed during the ‘AmritMahotsav’ will benefit forthcoming generations. Now it is also our responsibility to ensure that wherever ‘AmritSarovar’ have been built, they should be regularly looked after so that they remain the main source of water conservation.
Friends, amidst such discussions on water conservation; I also came to know about the ‘JalUtsav’ held in Amreli, Gujarat. There is also a lack of perennially flowing rivers in Gujarat, hence people have to depend mostly on rain water. During the last 20-25 years, after the efforts of the government and social organizations, the situation there has definitely changed. And hence ‘JalUtsav’ has a big role there. During the ‘JalUtsav’ held in Amreli, there were efforts to enhance awareness among the people on ‘water conservation’ and conservation of lakes. In that, water sports were also promoted and brainstorming was also done with experts on water security. The people participating in the program liked the tricolor water fountain very much. This water festival was organized by the foundation of SavjibhaiDholakia, who made a name for himself in the diamond business of Surat. I congratulate everyone involved in this and wish them all the best for doing similar work for water conservation.
My family members, nowadays the importance of skill development is finding acceptance all over the world. When we teach someone a skill, we not only give the person that skill; we also provide a source of income. And when I came to know that an organization has been engaged in skill development work for the last four decades, I felt even better. This institution is in Srikakulam, Andhra Pradesh and its name is ‘Beljipuram Youth Club’. Focusing on skill development, ‘Beljipuram Youth Club’ has empowered around 7000 women. Most of these women today are doing some work or the other on their own. This organization has also helped the children trapped in child labor to get out of that vicious cycle by teaching them some skill or the other. The team of ‘Beljipuram Youth Club’also taught new skills to the farmers associated with Farmer ProducerOrganizations i.e. FPOs, which has empowered a large number of farmers. This youth club is also spreading awareness in every village regarding cleanliness.It has also helped in the construction of many toilets. I congratulate and appreciate all the people associated with this organization for skill development. Today, such collective efforts are needed for skill development in every village of the country.
Friends, when there is a collective effort towards a goal, the level of success also rises higher. I want to share with all of you an inspiring example of Ladakh. You certainly must have heard about the Pashmina Shawl. Ladakhi Pashmina is also being discussed a lot for some time now. Ladakhi Pashmina is reaching the markets around the world under the name of ‘Looms of Ladakh’. You will be surprised to know that more than 450 women from 15 villages are involved in weaving them. Earlier they used to sell their products only to the tourists coming there. But now in this era of Digital India, the products made by them have started reaching different markets in the country and the world. That means our local is now becoming global and on account of that, the earnings of these women have also increased.
Friends, such successes of women power are present in every corner of the country. There is a need to bring such examples to the fore as much as possible. And what could be better than ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to convey this? So you too share such examples with me as much as possible. I will also try my best to bring them to you.
My family members, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we have been discussing such collective efforts which have brought about major changes in the society. Another achievement of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is that it has made radio more popular in every household. On MyGov, I have received a letter from Ram Singh BaudhJi of Amroha in Uttar Pradesh. Ram Singh ji has been engaged in the work of collecting radio sets for the last several decades. He says that after ‘Mann Ki Baat’, people’s curiosity about his Radio Museum has increased further. Similarly, inspired by ‘Mann Ki Baat’, TeerthdhamPrernaTeerth near Ahmadabad has organized an interesting exhibition. More than a 100 antique radios from India and abroad are displayed here. Here, all the episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ done till now can be heard. There are many more examples, which show how people got inspired by ‘Mann Ki Baat’ and started their own enterprise. One such example is that of Varshaji of Chamarajanagar, Karnataka, who was inspired by ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to stand on her own feet. Motivated by an episode of this program, she started the work of making organic fertilizer from bananas. This initiative of Varshaji, who is very fond of nature, has also brought employment opportunities for other people.
My family members, tomorrow the 27th of November, is the festival of KartikPurnima. ‘DevDeepawali’ is also celebrated on this day. And I always feel like witnessing ‘DevDeepawali’ of Kashi. This time I’ll not be able to go to Kashi but I am definitely sending my best wishes to the people of Banaras through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This time too, lakhs of lamps will be lit on the Ghats of Kashi; there will be a grand Aarti; there will be a laser show… lakhs of people from India and abroad will enjoy ‘DevDeepawali’.
Friends, tomorrow, on the day of the full moon, is also the Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak DevJi. Guru Nanak Ji’s precious messages are inspiring and relevant even today, not only for India but for the whole world. They inspire us to be simple, harmonious and dedicated towards others. Our Sikh brothers and sisters all over the world are seen following the teachings of Guru Nanak DevJi about the spirit of service and acts of service. I convey my very best wishes to all the listeners of Mann Ki Baat, on the Prakash Parv of Guru Nanak DevJi.
My family members, that’s all this time with mein ‘Mann Ki Baat’. By and by, 2023 is moving towards its end. And like every time, you and I are also thinking that look…this year has passed so quickly. But it is also true that this year has been a year of immense achievements for India, and India’s achievements are the achievements of every Indian. I am glad that ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has become a powerful medium to highlight such achievements of Indians. Next time we will talk to you again about the many successes of our countrymen. Till then, I take leave of you.
Thank you very much.
Namaskar.
My dear countrymen. Namaskar. ‘Mann Ki Baat’ means an auspicious opportunity to meet you, and when you meet your family members, it is so pleasing… so satisfying. This is exactly what I feel after meeting you through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. And of course today, this is the 108th episode of our shared journey. For us the importance of the number 108 and its sanctity is a subject of deep study. 108 beads in a rosary, chanting 108 times, 108 divine sites, 108 stairs in temples, 108 bells, this number 108 is associated with immense faith. That’s why the 108th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ has become all the more special for me. In these 108 episodes, we have seen many examples of public participation and derived inspiration from them. Now after reaching this milestone, we have to resolve to move forward afresh, with new energy and at a faster pace. And what a joyous coincidence it is that tomorrow’s sunrise will be the first sunrise of 2024 – we would have entered the year 2024. Best wishes to all of you for 2024.
Friends, many people who listened to ‘Mann Ki Baat’ have written letters to me and shared their memorable moments. It is on account of the strength of 140 crore Indians that this year, our country has attained many special achievements. In this very year, ‘Nari Shakti Vandan Act’, which has been awaited for years was passed.
Many people wrote letters expressing joy on India becoming the 5th largest economy. Many people reminded me of the success of the G20 Summit.
Friends, today every corner of India is brimming with self-confidence, imbued with the spirit of a developed India; the spirit of self-reliance. We have to maintain the same spirit and momentum in 2024 as well. The record business on Diwali proved that every Indian is giving importance to the mantra of ‘Vocal For Local’.
Friends, even today many people are sending me messages pertaining to the success of Chandrayaan-3. I am sure that, like me, you too feel proud of our scientists and especially women scientists.
Friends, when Natu-Natu won the Oscar, the whole country rejoiced with fervour. Who would not have been happy on hearing about the honour accorded to the ‘The Elephant Whisperers’? Through them the world saw the creativity of India and understood our bonding with the environment. This year our athletes also performed marvellously in sports. Our players won 107 medals in Asian Games and 111 medals in Asian Para Games. Indian players won everyone’s heart with their performance in the Cricket World Cup. The victory of our women’s cricket team in the Under-19 T-20 World Cup is very inspiring. The achievements of players in many other sports added to the glory of the country. Now Paris Olympics will be held in 2024, for which the whole country is encouraging her players.
Friends, whenever we made efforts together, it has had a very positive impact on the development journey of our country. We experienced successful campaigns such as ‘Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav’ and ‘Meri Mati Mera Desh’. We are all witness to the participation of crores of people in them. Construction of 70 thousand Amrit Sarovars is also our collective achievement.
Friends, I have always believed that the development of a country which does not give importance to innovation, stops. India, becoming an Innovation Hub is a symbol of the fact that we are not going to stop. In 2015 we were ranked 81st in the Global Innovation Index – today our rank is 40th. This year, the number of patents filed in India was high, of which about 60% were from domestic funds. This time the highest number of Indian universities have been included in the QS Asia University Rankings. If we start making a list of these achievements, it can never be completed. This is just a glimpse of how effective India’s potential is – we have to take inspiration from these successes of the country; these achievements of the people of the country; take pride in them, make new resolves. Once again, I wish you all a very happy 2024.
My family members, we just discussed the hope and enthusiasm about India that pervades everywhere – this hope and expectation is very good. When India turns developed, the youth will benefit the most. But the youth will benefit more, when they are fit.
Nowadays we see how much talk there is about Lifestyle related Diseases, it is a matter of great concern for all of us, especially the youth. For this ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I had requested all of you to send inputs related to Fit India. The response you people have given has filled me with enthusiasm. A large number of Startups have also sent me their suggestions on NaMo App; they have discussed many of their unique efforts.
Friends, through India’s efforts, 2023 was celebrated as International Year of Millets. This has given a lot of opportunities to the startups working in this field; these include many start-ups like ‘Keeros Foods’ started from Lucknow, ‘Grand-Maa Millets’ of Prayagraj and ‘Nutraceutical Rich Organic India’. The youth associated with Alpino Health Foods, Arboreal and Keeros Foods are also making new innovations regarding healthy food options. The youth associated with Unbox Health of Bengaluru have also expressed how they are helping people in choosing the diet of their liking. The way interest in physical health is increasing, the demand for coaches and trainers related to this field is also rising. Start-ups like Jogo Technologies are helping to meet this demand.
Friends, today there is a lot of discussion about physical health and well-being, but another important aspect related to it is that of mental health. I am very happy to know that Mumbai-based startups like Infi-Heal and YOUR-Dost are working to improve mental health and well-being. Not only that, today a technology like Artificial Intelligence is also being used for this. Friends, I can mention the names of only a few Startups here, because the list is very long. I would urge all of you to keep writing to me about innovative health care startups towards realizing the dream of Fit India. I also want to share with you the experiences of well-known people who talk about physical and mental health.
The first message is from Sadhguru Jaggi Vasudev ji.
He will share his views regarding Fitness, especially Fitness of the Mind, i.e., mental health.
****Audio*****
It is our privilege to talk about mental health in this Mann Ki Baat. Mental illnesses and how we keep our neurological system are very directly related. How alert static free and disturbance free we keep neurological system will decide how pleasant we feel within ourselves? What we call as peace, love, joy, blissfulness, agony, depression, ecstasies all have a chemical and neurological basis. Pharmacology is essentially trying to fix the chemical imbalance within the body by adding chemicals from outside. Mental illnesses are being managed this way but we must realize that taking chemicals from outside in the form of medications is necessary when one is in extreme situation. Working for an internal mental health situation or working for an equanimous chemistry within ourselves, a chemistry of peacefulness, joyfulness, blissfulness is something that has to be brought into every individual’s life; into the cultural life of a society and the Nations around the world and the entire humanity. It’s very important we understand our mental health, our sanity is a fragile privilege; we must protect it; we must nurture it. For this, there are many levels of practices in the Yogik system – completely internalized processes that people can do as simple practices with which they can bring a certain equanimity to the chemistry and certain calmness to their neurological system. The technologies of inner well-being are what we call as the yogik sciences. Let’s make it happen.
Generally, Sadhguru ji is known for presenting his views in such a remarkable way.
Come, now let us listen to the famous cricket player Harmanpreet Kaur ji.
****Audio****
Namaskar I want to say something to my countrymen through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Honorable Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi Ji’s Fit India initiative has encouraged me to share my fitness mantra with all of you. My first suggestion to all of you is ‘one cannot out train a bad diet’. This means that you have to be very careful about when you eat and what you eat. Recently, Honorable Prime Minister Modi ji has encouraged everyone to eat pearl millet. Which increases immunity and helps in sustainable farming and is also easy to digest. Regular exercise and full sleep of 7 hours is very important for the body and helps in staying fit. This will require a lot of discipline and consistency. When you start getting results, you will start exercising yourself daily. Many thanks to the Honorable Prime Minister for giving me the opportunity to talk to you all and share my fitness mantra.
The words of a talented player like Harmanpreet ji will definitely inspire you all.
Come, listen to Grandmaster Vishwanathan Anand ji. We all know how important mental fitness is for our game of ‘Chess’.
****Audio*****
Namaste, I am Vishwanathan Anand you have seen me play Chess and very often I am asked, what is your fitness routine? Now Chess requires a lot of focus and patience, so I do the following which keeps me fit and agile. I do yoga two times a week, I do cardio two times a week and two times a week, I focus on flexibility, stretching, weight training and I tend to take one day off per week. All of these are very important for chess. You need to have the stamina to last 6 or 7 hours of intense mental effort, but you also need to be flexible to able to sit comfortably and the ability to regulate your breath to calm down is helpful when you want to focus on some problem, which is usually a Chess game. My fitness tip to all ‘Mann Ki Baat’ listeners would be to keep calm and focus on the task ahead.
The best fitness tip for me absolutely the most important fitness tip is to get a good night sleep. Do not start sleeping for four and five hours a night, I think seven or eight is a absolute minimum so we should try as hard as possible to get good night sleep, because that is when the next day you are able to get through the day in calm fashion. You don’t make impulsive decisions; you are in control of your emotions. For me sleep is the most important fitness tip.
Come, now let’s listen to Akshay Kumar ji.
****Audio*****
Hello, I am Akshay Kumar. First of all, I would like to thank our respected Prime Minister for getting me a little chance to share my thoughts with you in his ‘Mann Ki Baat’. You guys know that much as I am passionate about fitness, I am even more passionate about staying fit in a natural way. What I like more than a fancy gym, is swimming outside, playing badminton, climbing stairs, exercising with a mudgar club bell, eating good healthy food… like I believe that pure ghee if eaten in right quantity is beneficial for us. But I see that many young boys and girls do not eat ghee because they fear that they might become fat. It is very important that we understand what is good and what is bad for our fitness. You should change your lifestyle on the advice of doctors and not by looking at the body of a film star. Actors are often not what they look like on screen. Many types of filters and special effects are used and after seeing them, we start using wrong shortcuts to change our body. Nowadays, so many people take steroids and go for this six pack or eight pack. Friend, with such shortcuts the body swells from outside but remains hollow from inside. You guys remember that shortcut can cut your life short. You don’t need a shortcut, you need long lasting fitness. Friends, fitness is a kind of penance. It is not instant coffee or two-minute noodles. In this New Year, promise yourself… no chemicals, no shortcut exercise, yoga, good food, sleeping on time, some meditation and most importantly, happily accept the way you look. After today, don’t live a filter life, live a fitter life. Take care. Jai Mahakal.
There are many other start-ups in this sector, so I thought of discussing it with a young start-up founder who is doing excellent work in this field.
****Audio*****
Hello, my name is Rishabh Malhotra and I am from Bengaluru. I am very happy to know that fitness is being discussed in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. I myself belong to the world of fitness and we have a start-up in Bengaluru named ‘Tagda Raho’. Our start-up has been created to bring forward the traditional exercises of India. There is a very amazing exercise in the traditional exercises of India which is ‘Gada Exercise’ and our entire focus is on Mace and Mugdar exercise only. People are surprised to know how you do all the training with a mace. I would like to tell you that mace exercise is thousands of years old and it has been practiced in India for thousands of years. You must have seen it in big and small akhadas and through our start-up we have brought it back in a modern form. We have received a lot of affection from the entire country and a very good response. Through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I would like to tell you that apart from this, there are many ancient exercises in India and methods related to health and fitness, which we should adopt and teach further in the world. I am from the world of fitness, so I would like to give you a personal tip. With mace exercise you can improve your strength, power, posture and even your breathing, so adopt mace exercise and take it forward. Jai Hind.
Friends, everyone has expressed one’s own views but everyone has the same mantra – ‘Stay Healthy, Stay Fit’. What could be a bigger resolve than your own fitness to start 2024?
My family members, a few days ago an experiment took place in Kashi, which I want to share with the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. You know that thousands of people had reached Kashi from Tamil Nadu to participate in the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam. There I publicly used the Artificial Intelligence AI tool Bhashini for the first time to communicate with them. I was addressing from the stage in Hindi but through the AI tool Bhashini, the people of Tamil Nadu present there were listening to my address in Tamil language simultaneously. People who came to the Kashi-Tamil Sangamam seemed very excited about this experiment. The day is not far when an address will be delivered in one language and the public will listen to the same speech in their own language in real time. The same will happen with films also when the public will listen to Real Time Translation with the help of AI in the cinema hall. You can imagine how big a change would take place when this technology starts being widely used in our schools, our hospitals, our courts. I would urge today’s young generation to further explore AI tools related to Real Time Translation and make them 100% fool proof.
Friends, in the changing times we have to save our languages and also promote them. I now want to tell you about a tribal village in Jharkhand. This village has taken a unique initiative to provide education to its children in their mother tongue. Children are being imparted education in Kudukh language in Manglo village of Garhwa district. The name of this school is, ‘Karthik Oraon Aadivasi Kudukh School’. 300 tribal children study in this school. Kudukh language is the mother tongue of the Oraon tribal community. Kudukh language also has its own script, which is known as Tolang Siki.
This language was gradually becoming extinct; to save it, this community has decided to educate children in their own language. Arvind Oraon, who started this school, says that the tribal children had difficulty in English language, so he started teaching the village children in their mother tongue. When his efforts started yielding better results, the villagers also joined him. On account of studies in their own language, the pace of children’s learning also increased. In our country, many children used to leave studies midway due to language difficulties. The new National Education Policy is also helping in eliminating such hardships. It is our endeavour that language should not become a hindrance in the education and progress of any child.
Friends, the extraordinary daughters have filled our Bharat Bhoomi with pride in every era. Savitribai Phule ji and Rani Velu Nachiyar ji are two such luminaries of the country. Their personality is like a lighthouse, which will continue to show the way to further woman power in every era. Just a few days from now, on January 3, we will all celebrate the birth anniversaries of the two. As soon as the name of Savitribai Phule ji is mentioned, the first thing that strikes us is her contribution in the field of education and social reform. She always raised her voice strongly for the education of women and the underprivileged. She was far ahead of her time and always remained vocal in opposing wrong practices.
She had deep faith in the empowerment of society through education. Along with Mahatma Phule ji, she started many schools for daughters. Her poems used to raise awareness and fill self-confidence amongst people. She always urged people to help each other in need and also live in harmony with nature. The magnitude of her kindness cannot be summed up in words. When a famine struck in Maharashtra, Savitribai and Mahatma Phule opened the doors of their homes to help the needy. Such an example of social justice is rarely seen. When the dreadful plague had spread there, she threw herself into the service of the people. During all this, she herself fell prey to this disease. Her life dedicated to humanity is still inspiring all of us.
Friends, the name of Rani Velu Nachiyar is also one among the many great personalities of the country who fought against foreign rule. My brothers and sisters of Tamil Nadu still remember her by the name of Veera Mangai i.e. brave woman. The bravery with which Rani Velu Nachiyar fought against the British and the valour she displayed is very inspiring. Her husband, was killed by the British during their attack on the Sivagangai kingdom, who was the king there. Queen Velu Nachiyar and her daughter somehow escaped from the enemies. She relentlessly remained busy for many years in building an organization and raising an army with the Marudu Brothers i.e. her commanders. She started the war against the British with full preparation and fought with great courage and determination. The name of Rani Velu Nachiyar is included among those who formed an All-Women Group for the first time in their army. I offer my tributes to these two brave women.
My family members, there is a tradition of Dairo in Gujarat. Throughout the night, thousands of people join Dairo and acquire knowledge along with entertainment. In this Dairo, the trinity of folk music, folk literature and humour fills everyone’s mind with joy. Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji is a famous artist of this Dairo. As a comedian, Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji has maintained his influence for more than 30 years. Recently I received a letter from Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji and along with it he has also sent one of his books. The name of the book is – Social Audit of Social Service. This book is very unique. With accounts in it, this book is a kind of balance sheet. The complete account of how much income Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji received from particular programs in the last 6 years and where it was spent is given in the book. This Balance Sheet is unique because he spent his entire income, every single rupee, for the society – School, Hospital, Library, institutions related to disabled people, social service – the entire 6 years are accounted for. As it is written at one place in the book, in 2022, he earned two crore thirty five lakh eighty nine thousand six hundred seventy four rupees from his programs. And he spent two crore thirty five lakh eighty nine thousand six hundred seventy four rupees on School, Hospital, Library. He did not keep even a single rupee with himself. Actually, there is an interesting incident behind this also. It so happened that once Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji said that when he turns 50 in 2017, he will not take home the income from his programs but will spend it on society. Since 2017, he has spent approximately Rs 8.75 crores on myriad social work. A comedian, with his words, compelles everyone to laugh. But how many emotions he lives within, this can be seen from the life of Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji. You will be surprised to know that he also has three PhD degrees. He has written 75 books, many of which have received acclaims. He has also been honoured with many awards for social work. I wish Bhai Jagdish Trivedi ji all the best for his social work.
My family members, there is excitement and enthusiasm in the entire country in connection with the Ram Mandir in Ayodhya. People are expressing their feelings in a multitude of ways. You must have noticed that during the last few days, many new songs and new bhajans have been composed on Shri Ram and Ayodhya. Many people are also writing new poems. There are many experienced artists in it and new emerging young artists have also composed heart-warming bhajans. I have also shared some songs and bhajans on my social media. It seems that the art world is becoming a participant in this historic moment in its own unique style. One thing comes to my mind… could we all share all such creations with a common hash tag? I request you to share your creations on social media with the hashtag Shri Ram Bhajan (#shriRamBhajan). This compilation will turn into a flow of emotions and devotion in which everyone will be immersively imbued with the ethos of Ram.
My dear countrymen, that’s all with me today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. 2024 is just a few hours away. India’s achievements are the achievements of every Indian. We have to continuously work for the development of India keeping in mind the Panch Pran. Whatever work we do, whatever decision we make, our first criterion should be… what the country will get from it; what benefit it will bring to the country. Rashtra Pratham – Nation First – There is no greater mantra than this. Adhering to this mantra, we Indians will make our country developed and self-reliant. May you all reach new heights of success in 2024, may you all stay healthy, stay fit, stay immensely happy – this is my prayer. In 2024 we will once again discuss the new achievements of the people of the country.
Thank you very much.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. This is the first ‘Mann Ki Baat’ program of 2024. There is a new enthusiasm, a new wave in Amritkaal. Two days ago, all of us countrymen celebrated the 75th Republic Day with great pomp and fervour. This year our Constitution is also attaining completion of 75 years… and the Supreme Court is also completing 75 years. These festivals of our democracy further strengthen India as the Mother of Democracy. The Constitution of India has come into being after such intense brainstorming that it is called a living document. In part three of the original copy of this very Constitution, the fundamental rights of the citizens of India have been described and it is note-worthy that at the beginning of Part three, the makers of our Constitution had allotted due space to the pictures of Bhagwan Ram, Mata Sita and Lakshman ji. The rule of Prabhu Ram was also a source of inspiration for the makers of our Constitution and that is why on January 22 in Ayodhya, I had talked about ‘Dev se Desh’… I’d referred to ‘Ram se Rashtra’.
Friends, the occasion of Pran Pratishtha in Ayodhya seems to have bound around a common thread, crores of people of the country together. Everyone’s feelings are unanimous, everyone’s devotion is in unison… Ram is in everyone’s words, Ram is in everyone’s heart. During this period, many people of the country sang Ram Bhajans dedicating them at the feet of Shri Ram. On the evening of the 22nd of January, the entire country lit Ram Jyoti and celebrated Diwali. During this time, the country saw the power of togetherness, which is also a major basis for our resolves of a developed India.
I had requested the people of the country to run a cleanliness campaign from Makar Sankranti to the 22nd of January. I felt good that lakhs of people joined with devotion and cleaned religious places of their area. Many people have sent me pictures and videos related to this – this sentiment should not diminish… this campaign should not stop. This power of collectivity will take our country to new heights of success.
My dear countrymen, this time the parade of 26th January was awesome, but the most discussed element was seeing Women Power in the Parade… when the women contingents of Central Security Forces and Delhi Police started marching on Kartavya path, everyone was filled with pride. On Seeing the Marching of the women’s band and seeing their tremendous coordination, people in the country and abroad were thrilled. This time, out of the 20 contingents that marched in the Parade, 11 were of women. We saw that even in the tableaux that went by, all the artistes were women. About one and a half thousand daughters took part in the cultural programs that took place. Many female artistes were playing Indian musical instruments like Conch, Nadaswaram and Nagada. The tableau belonging to DRDO also attracted everyone’s attention. It showed how woman power is protecting the country in every field – water, land, sky, cyber and space. India of the 21st century is thus moving ahead with the mantra of Women Led Development.
Friends, you must have watched the Arjuna Award ceremony just a few days ago. In that, many promising players and athletes of the country have been honoured at Rashtrapati Bhavan. Here too, something that attracted a lot of people’s attention was the Arjuna Awardee daughters and their life journeys. This time 13 women athletes have been honored with the Arjuna Award.
These women athletes participated in many major tournaments and brought glory to the flag of India. Physical challenges, economic challenges could not hold up vis-à-vis these courageous and talented players. In the changing India, our daughters, women of the country are performing wonders in every field. There is another area where women have made their mark, that is self-help groups. Today, the number of women self-help groups in the country has also increased and their scope of work has also expanded a lot. That day is not far when you will see Namo Drone Didis helping in farming using drones in the fields in every village. I came to know about women preparing bio fertilizer and bio pesticide using local ingredients in Bahraich, UP. The women of Nibiya Begumpur village, associated with self-help groups, prepare bio-fertilizer by mixing cow dung, neem leaves and many types of medicinal plants. Similarly, these women also prepare an organic pesticide by preparing a paste of ginger, garlic, onion and chilli. These women together have formed an organization named ‘Unnati Jaivik Ikai’. This organization helps these women in preparing bio products. The demand for bio fertilizer and bio pesticide made by them is also continuously rising. Today, more than 6 thousand farmers from nearby villages are buying bio products from them. Through this, the income of these women associated with self-help groups has increased, and their financial condition has improved as well.
My dear countrymen, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’ we highlight the efforts of those countrymen who are working selflessly to strengthen the society and the country. In such a situation, when the country has announced the Padma Awards three days ago, it is natural to discuss such people in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. This time too, Padma honors have been conferred upon many countrymen who, by connecting with the grassroots, have worked to bring about big changes in the society.
A lot of curiosity across the country to know about the life journey of these inspiring people has been noticed. Away from media headlines, away from the front pages of newspapers, these people have been engaged in social service without any lime-light. We have hardly seen or heard anything about these people earlier, but now I am happy that after the announcement of Padma Awards, people such as these are being discussed everywhere; people are eager to know more and more about them. Most of these Padma Award recipients are doing unique work in their respective fields. Like, somebody is providing an ambulance service, while another is arranging a roof over the head for the destitute. There are some who are engaged in nature conservation efforts by planting thousands of trees. There is also one, who has worked for the conservation of more than 650 varieties of rice. There is one as well who is spreading awareness in the society for the prevention of drug and alcohol addiction. Many people are engaged in connecting people with Self Help Groups, especially the Nari Shakti campaign. Countrymen are also very happy about the fact that 30 of those who received the honour are women. These women are taking the society and the country forward through their work at the grassroots level.
Friends, the contribution of each one of the Padma Awardees is an inspiration for the countrymen. This time, a large number of people receiving honors are those who are bringing glory to the country in the world of classical dance, classical music, folk dance, theater and bhajans. This honor has also been conferred upon those who have done excellent work in Prakrit, Malvi and Lambadi languages. Many people from abroad have also been honored with the Padma Award, whose work is lending new heights to Indian culture and heritage. These also include citizens of France, Taiwan, Mexico and Bangladesh.
Friends, I am very happy that the system of Padma awards has completely changed in the last decade. Now it has become the People’s Padma. There have been many changes in the system of conferring the Padma awards. People even have a chance to nominate themselves now. This is the reason why this time 28 times more nominations have been received compared to 2014. This shows that the prestige of The Padma Award, its credibility and respect for it is rising every year. I once again extend my best wishes to all those receiving the Padma Awards.
My dear countrymen, it is said that every life has a goal; everyone is born to fulfill a goal. For that, people perform their duties with full devotion. We have seen that some people perform their duties through social service, some by joining the army, some by teaching the next generation, but friends, there are some people among us who even after the end of life, fulfill their responsibilities towards society and life and their medium for that is organ donation. In recent years, there have been more than a thousand people in the country who donated their organs after their death. This decision is not easy, but this decision is a saver of multiple lives. I would also appreciate those families who respected the last wishes of their near and dear ones. Today, many organizations in the country are also making very inspiring efforts in this direction. Some organizations are making people aware about organ donation, some organizations are helping in registering the people willing to donate organs. Due to such efforts, a positive environment is being created in the country towards organ donation and people’s lives are also being saved.
My dear countrymen, I am now sharing with you an achievement of India which will make the life of patients easier and their problems will be mitigated to an extent.
There must be many people among you, who get help from Ayurveda, Siddha or Unani system of medicine for treatment. But such patients face problems when they go to some other doctor of the same system. In these medical practices, a common language is not used for the terminology of diseases, treatments and medicines. Every doctor writes the name of the disease and methods of treatment in one’s own way. This sometimes makes it very difficult for other doctors to understand. A solution to this problem that has been going on for decades has now been found. I am happy to share that the Ministry of AYUSH has categorized the data and terminology related to Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicine, with the help of the World Health Organization as well. Through the efforts of both, the terminology related to disease and treatment in Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha medicine has been codified. With the help of this coding, all doctors will now write the same language on their prescriptions or slips. One advantage of this would be that if you go to another doctor with that slip, the doctor will get complete information about it from just that slip. That slip will help one in knowing one’s illness, treatment, what medicines one has been taking, for how long the treatment has been going on, what things one is allergic to. Another benefit of this will accrue to those people, who are associated with research work. Scientists from other countries will also get complete information about the disease, medicines and their effects. As the research expands and many scientists come together, these medical systems will field better results and people’s inclination towards them will rise. I am confident that our doctors associated with these AYUSH systems will adopt this coding as soon as possible.
My friends, when I am referring to AYUSH system of medicine, pictures of Yanung Jamoh Lego are also coming before my eyes. Ms. Yanung is a resident of Arunachal Pradesh and is a herbal medicinal expert.
She has done a lot of work to revive the traditional medical system of the Adi tribe. This time she has also been conferred with the Padma Award for this contribution. Similarly, this time Hemchand Manjhi of Chhattisgarh has also received the Padma Award. Vaidyaraj Hemchand Manjhi also treats people with the help of AYUSH system of medicine. He has been serving poor patients in Narayanpur, Chhattisgarh for more than 5 decades. People like Ms. Yanung and Hemchand ji have a big role in preserving the treasure of Ayurveda and herbal medicine hidden in our country.
My dear countrymen, our mutual relationship through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is a decade old now. Even in this era of social media and internet, radio is a powerful medium to connect the entire country. A unique example of how much change the power of radio can bring about is being seen in Chhattisgarh. For the last almost 7 years, a popular program is being broadcast on the radio here, whose name is ‘Hamar Hathi – Hamar Goth’. Hearing the name you may wonder what connection there could be between radio and the elephant! But this is the beauty of radio. In Chhattisgarh, this program is broadcast every evening from four stations of Akashvani – Ambikapur, Raipur, Bilaspur and Raigarh and you will be surprised to know that the people living in the forests of Chhattisgarh and its surrounding areas listen to this program with great attention. In the program ‘Hamar Hathi – Hamar Goth’ it is announced through which area of the forest a herd of elephants is passing. This information is very useful for the people here. As soon as people get information through radio about the arrival of a herd of elephants, they become alert. The danger of crossing the paths through which elephants pass is averted. On the one hand, this reduces the possibility of damage caused by elephant herds; on the other, it helps in gathering data about elephants. The use of this data will also help in the conservation of elephants in future.
Here, information related to elephants is also being disseminated to the people through social media. This has made it easier for the people living around the forest to strike a balance with the elephants. People living in other forest areas of the country can also take advantage of this unique initiative of Chhattisgarh and its experiences.
My dear countrymen, on this very 25th of January we all have celebrated National Voters Day. This is an important day for our glorious democratic traditions. Today there are approximately 96 crore voters in the country. Do you know how big this figure is? This is almost three times more than the total population of America. This is about one and a half times more than the total population of entire Europe. If we refer to polling stations, their number in the country today is around 10.5 lakh. To enable every citizen of India to exercise their democratic rights, our Election Commission sets up polling booths even at places where there is only one voter. I would like to commend the Election Commission, which has made relentless efforts to strengthen democratic values in the country.
Friends, today it is a matter of enthusiasm for the country that while the voting percentage is decreasing in many countries of the world, the voting percentage in India is increasing. In 1951-52, when elections were held for the first time in the country, only about 45 percent of the voters cast their votes. Today this figure has increased significantly. Not only has the number of voters increased in the country, but turnout has also increased. The government has also made amendments in the law so that our young voters can get more opportunities for registration. I am also happy to notice that many efforts are being made at the community level to increase awareness among voters. At some places people go door to door and tell voters about voting.
At other places the youth are being attracted through painting; elsewhere through street plays. Every such effort is infusing myriad colors into the celebration of our democracy. Through ‘Mann Ki Baat’ I will ask my first time voters to definitely get their names added to the voter list. They can easily complete it online through the National Voter Service Portal and Voter Helpline App. You should always remember that one vote of yours can change the destiny of the country; can fashion the destiny of the country.
My dear countrymen, today the 28th of January also marks the birth anniversaries of two great personalities of India who have set an example of patriotism in different periods of time. Today the country, is paying tribute to Punjab Kesari Lala Lajpat Rai ji. Lala ji was a freedom fighter, who sacrificed his life to liberate us from foreign rule. Lala ji’s personality cannot be limited only to the freedom struggle. He was immensely far sighted. He played an instrumental role in the establishment of Punjab National Bank and many other institutions. His objective was not only to expel foreigners from the country, but the vision of giving economic strength to the country was also an important part of his thought. His thought and his sacrifice greatly influenced Bhagat Singh. Today is also a day to pay homage to Field Marshal K.M. Cariappa ji with reverence. He set an example of courage and bravery by leading our army during an important period of history. He has an important contribution in making our army stronger.
My dear countrymen, today India is attaining new heights every day in the world of sports. To excel in the world of sports, it is imperative that players get as many opportunities as possible to play and well organized sports tournaments are held in the country. With this thought in mind, new sports tournaments are being organized in India today.
Just a few days ago, Khelo India Youth Games were inaugurated in Chennai. More than 5 thousand athletes of the country are participating in this. I am happy that today such new platforms are continuously being created in India, in which players are getting an opportunity to display their potential. One such platform that has been created – Beach Games, was organized in Diu. You know for sure that ‘Diu’ is a Union Territory, very close to Somnath. These Beach Games were organized in Diu in the beginning of this year itself. These were India’s first multi-sports beach games. These included competitions like Tug of war, Sea swimming, pencak silat, Malkhamb, Beach volleyball, Beach Kabaddi, Beach soccer, and Beach Boxing. In this, every contestant got ample opportunity to showcase one’s talent and you will be surprised to know that in this tournament many players came from states which have no connection whatsoever with the sea. Madhya Pradesh won the maximum medals in this tournament, where there is no sea beach. It is this temperament towards sports that makes any country the crowning glory of the sports world.
My dear countrymen, that’s all this time with me in ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Shall talk to you once again in February. Our focus will be on how the country is marching ahead through the collective and individual efforts of the people of the country. Friends, tomorrow, on the 29th at 11 am we will also have Pariksha Pe Charcha’. This will be the 7th edition of ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’. This is one program, which I always look forward to. This gives me an opportunity to interact with students, and I also try to mitigate their exam related stress. In the last 7 years, ‘Pariksha Pe Charcha’ has emerged as a very good medium to discuss various issues related to education and examinations. I am happy that this time more than 2.25 crore students have registered for it and have also put forward their inputs. Let me tell you that when we first began this program in 2018, this number was a mere 22,000.
Many innovative efforts have also been undertaken to inspire students and spread awareness about exam related stress. I urge all of you, especially the youth & students to join in record numbers tomorrow. I too would love to talk to you. With these words, I take leave of you in this episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. See you again soon. Thank you.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. Welcome to the 110th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. As always, this time too we have received a lot of your suggestions, inputs and comments. And like always, this time as well, selecting topics to be included in the episode, is a challenge. I have received many an input, one better than the other, full of positivity. These comprise due mention of many countrymen who are striving to improve the lives of others by becoming a ray of hope for them.
Friends, just after a few days on the 8th of March, we will celebrate ‘Women’s Day’. This special day is an opportunity to salute the contribution of woman power in the developmental journey of the country. Mahakavi Bharatiyar ji has said that the world will prosper only when women get equal opportunities. Today the woman power of India is touching new heights of progress in every field. Who would have thought till a few years ago that in our country, women living in villages too would fly drones? But today this is becoming possible. Today there is so much discussion about Drone Didi in every village… “Namo Drone Didi, Namo Drone Didi”, adorns everyone’s lips. Everyone is talking about them. A big curiosity has arisen and that is why, I also thought that this time in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, why not talk to a NaMo Drone Didi! Namo Drone Didi Sunita ji, who’s from Sitapur, Uttar Pradesh, is at the moment connected with us. Let’s speak to her.
Call-1.
Modi ji: Sunita Devi ji, Namaskar.
Sunita Devi: Namaste Sir.
Modi ji: Okay Sunita ji, at the outset, I wish to know about you; I want to know about your family. Tell me a bit.
Sunita Devi: Sir, there are two children in our family, I’m there, husband is there; my mother is there.
Modi ji: What has your education been Sunita ji?
Sunita Devi: Sir, it is BA (Final).
Modi ji: And what is the nature of work in the household?
Sunita Devi: Work related to agriculture, farming etc.
Modi ji: Okay Sunita ji, how did your journey of becoming a Drone Didi start? Where did you get the training, what kind of changes took place; I want to know, right from the beginning.
Sunita Devi: Ji Sir, the training was done in our Phulpur IFFCO company in Allahabad… and we got training there itself.
Modi ji: So till then had you ever heard about drones?
Sunita Devi: Sir, I had not heard about that… though we had seen once, at the Krishi Vigyan Kendra in Sitapur… we had seen it there… for the first time we had seen a drone there.
Modi ji: Sunita ji, I want to understand that right since you went there on the first day.
Modi ji: You must have been shown a drone on the first day… then something must have been taught to you on the board; taught on paper, then taken to the field for practice… what all must have happened! Can you explain to me with complete description?
Sunita Devi: Ji-Ji Sir. On the first day sir we all went there… our training started from the second day. First the theory was taught and then the class went on for two days. In the class, what are the parts of a drone, how and what you have to do – all these things were taught in theory. On the third day, sir, we had our paper… after that sir, there was a paper also on the computer… meaning, first the class was conducted and then the test was taken. Then practical was conducted, that is, how to fly the drone, how to handle the controls, everything was taught in practical mode.
Modi ji: Then what work would the drone do, how was that taught?
Sunita Devi: Sir, the drone will work, when the crop is growing. During the rainy season or anything like that…
Sunita Devi: well, there is a problem during the rains and we are not able to enter the fields to harvest the crops, so how will the farmhands go inside! Then through this, the farmers will benefit a lot and they will not even have to enter the fields. We can do the work done by labourers using our drone, we can do our work by standing on the farm boundary, we will have to be careful if there are any insects inside the field, there won’t be any problem and the farmers are also feeling very good. Sir, we have sprayed over 35 acres so far.
Modi ji: So do farmers also understand that it has benefits?
Sunita Devi: Yes Sir, the farmers feel very satisfied… they are saying that they are feeling very good. Time is also saved, you look after all the facilities yourself… water, medicine, everything is kept together and we just have to come to the farm and note from where to where the farm is… and I finish the entire work within half an hour.
Modi ji: So other people would also be coming over to see this drone?
Sunita Devi: Sir, there is a huge crowd… many people come to see the drone. Those who are big farmers, they also take our number, saying that we would also be called for spraying.
Modi ji: Okay. Because I have a mission to make Lakhpati Didi… if sisters across the country are listening today, a Drone Didi is talking to me for the first time. What would you like to say?
Sunita Devi: Just like today I am the only Drone Didi, thousands of such sisters should come forward to become Drone Didi like me and I will be very happy that when I am alone, thousands of other people will stand with me… it will feel very good that we’re not alone… many people are with me known as Drone Didis!
Modi ji: Well Sunita ji, many congratulations to you from my side. This Namo Drone Didi is becoming a great means to modernize agriculture in the country. My very best wishes.
Sunita Devi: Thank you, Thank you Sir.
Modi ji: Thank you!
Friends, today there is no region in the country where the woman power has lagged behind. Another area where women have demonstrated their leadership abilities is natural farming, water conservation and sanitation. The suffering, the pain and the hardships that our mother earth is facing due to chemicals – the Matrishakti of the country is playing a big role in saving our mother earth. Women are now extending natural farming in every corner of the country. Today, if so much work is being done in the country under the ‘Jal Jeevan Mission’, water committees have had a big role to play in it. The leadership of these water committees lies only with women. Apart from this, sisters and daughters are making all-out efforts for water conservation. One such lady, Kalyani Prafulla Patil ji is on the phone line with me. She is a resident of Maharashtra.
Come let’s talk to Kalyani Prafulla Patil ji and know about her experience.
Call 2
Prime Minister – Kalyani ji, Namaste.
Kalyani ji – Namaste Sir Ji, Namaste.
Prime Minister – Kalyani ji, first of all tell us about yourself, your family, your work.
Kalyani ji – Sir, I am MSC Microbiology and at home I have my husband, my mother-in-law and my two children and I have been working in my Gram Panchayat for three years.
Prime Minister – And then you got engaged in farming work in the village? Since you have basic knowledge as well, you have also studied in this field and now you have joined farming, so what all new experiments have you conducted?
Kalyani ji – Sir, we collected ten types of flora and we have made an organic spray from it, just like when we spray pesticides etc.,
Kalyani ji – the pests etc. that remain in our Mitra-Keet i.e. friendly insects are also getting destroyed and there is pollution of our soil which is causing harmful effects on our body due to the chemicals getting mixed in the water. Accordingly, we have used minimum pesticides.
Prime Minister – So in a way you are moving towards natural farming, completely!
Kalyani ji – Yes, which is our traditional farming Sir; we did it last year.
Prime Minister – What experience did you have in natural farming?
Kalyani ji – Sir, the expenses incurred by our women were less and the products are there, sir, after getting that solution, we did it without pests… because now the evidence of cancer is increasing in urban areas… yes, it is there, but the evidence of it is increasing in our villages too, so accordingly, if you want to protect your future family, then it is necessary to adopt this path. Accordingly, those women are also displaying active participation in it.
Prime Minister – Okay Kalyani ji, have you also done some work in water conservation? What have you done in that?
Kalyani ji – Sir, through rainwater harvesting at government buildings like primary school, Anganwadi, our Gram Panchayat building… we have collected all the rain water there, at one place. Sir, the rain water that falls should percolate into the ground through recharge shafts… Kalyani ji – so accordingly we have made 20 recharge shafts in our village and secured sanction for 50 recharge shafts. Now that work is also going to start soon.
Prime Minister – Well Kalyani ji, it was a pleasure to talk to you. Many best wishes to you.
Kalyani ji – Thank you sir, thank you sir. I was also very happy to talk to you. Meaning, I believe that my life has become completely meaningful.
Prime Minister – Just keep serving!
Prime Minister – Well, your name is Kalyani, so you have to look after welfare. Thank you ji. Namaskar
Kalyani ji – Thank you sir. Thank you
Friends, whether it is Sunita ji or Kalyani ji, the success of woman power in myriad fields is very inspiring. I once again appreciate this spirit of our woman power, from the core of my heart.
My dear countrymen, today the importance of technology has increased manifold in the lives of all of us. Mobile phones and digital gadgets have become an important part of everyone’s life. But can you imagine that with the help of digital gadgets, we are now getting help in creating a balance with wild animals!
A few days later, on the 3
rd
of March, it is ‘World Wildlife Day’. This day is celebrated with the aim of spreading awareness on the conservation of wild animals. This year, Digital Innovation has been kept paramount in the theme of the World Wild Life Day. You will be happy to know that technology is being used extensively for the conservation of wildlife in different parts of our country. During the the last few years, through the efforts of the government, the number of tigers in the country has increased. The number of tigers in the Tiger Reserve of Chandrapur, Maharashtra has risen to more than 250.
The help of Artificial Intelligence is being taken to reduce conflict between humans and tigers in Chandrapur district. Here cameras have been installed on the border of the villages and the forest. Whenever a tiger comes near a village; with the help of AI, local people get an alert on their mobile. Today, this system has provided a lot of convenience to the people in the 13 villages around this Tiger Reserve and the tigers have also got protection.
Friends, today young entrepreneurs are also working in new innovations for wildlife conservation and eco-tourism. In Roorkee, Uttarakhand, Rotor Precision Group in collaboration with Wildlife Institute of India has developed a drone which is helping to keep an eye on the crocodiles in the Ken River. Similarly, a Bengaluru company has prepared an app named ‘Bagheera’ and ‘Garuda’.
With the Bagheera App, the speed of the vehicle and other activities can be monitored during a jungle safari. It is being used in many Tiger Reserves of the country. The Garuda App, based on Artificial Intelligence and Internet of Things, starts providing real time alerts on connecting it to any CCTV.
With every such effort towards conservation of wildlife, the biodiversity of our country is becoming richer.
Friends, in India harmony with nature has been an integral part of our culture. We have been living with a spirit of coexistence with nature and wildlife for thousands of years. If you ever go to the Melghat Tiger Reserve in Maharashtra, you will be able to experience it for yourself. Tribal families living in Khatkali village near this Tiger Reserve have converted their houses into home stays with the help of the government. This is becoming a big source of income for them. Prakash Jamkar ji of Korku tribe living in the same village has built a seven-room home stay on his two hectare land. His family makes arrangements for food and drink for the tourists staying at his place. Along with medicinal plants, he has also planted mango and coffee trees around his house. This has not only increased the attraction of tourists; it has also created new employment opportunities for other people.
My dear countrymen, when we talk about animal husbandry, we often stop at cows and buffaloes only. But the goat is also an important animal, which is not discussed much.
Many people in different areas of the country are also associated with goat rearing. In Kalahandi, Odisha, goat rearing is becoming a major means of improving the livelihood of the village people as well as their standard of living. Behind this effort is a major decision of Jayanti Mahapatra ji and her husband Biren Sahu ji. Both of them were management professionals in Bengaluru, but they decided to take a break and come to Salebhata village of Kalahandi. These people wanted to do something that would solve the problems of the villagers here and simultaneously empower them. With this thinking full of service and dedication, they established Manikastu Agro and started working with the farmers. Jayanti ji and Biren ji have also opened an interesting Manikastu Goat Bank here. They are promoting goat rearing at the community level. There are about dozens of goats at their Goat Farm.
Manikastu Goat Bank has set up a complete system for the farmers. Through this, farmers are given two goats for 24 months. Goats give birth to 9 to 10 kids in 2 years, out of which 6 kids are kept by the bank, the rest are given to the same family which rears goats. Not only that, necessary services are also provided for the care of goats.
Today more than 1000 farmers from 50 villages are associated with this couple. With their help, the village people are moving towards self-reliance in the field of animal husbandry.
I feel very happy to see that successful professionals in various fields are adopting novel methods to make small farmers empowered and self-reliant. Their efforts are going to inspire everyone.
My dear countrymen, the essence of the teachings of our culture is – ‘Parmarth Paramo Dharmah’ i.e. helping others is the highest duty. Following this sentiment, countless people in our country dedicate their lives to serving others selflessly. One such person is – Bhim Singh Bhavesh ji of Bhojpur in Bihar. There is a lot of buzz about his work among the people of the Musahar caste of his region. That’s why I thought why not talk to you about him as well today! Musahar has been a very deprived community in Bihar; a very poor community. Bhim Singh Bhavesh ji has focused on the education of the children of this community, so that their future could be bright. He has enrolled about 8 thousand children of Musahar caste in school. He has also built a big library, through which children are getting better facilities for education.
Bhim Singh ji also helps his community members in making necessary documents and filling up their forms. This has further improved the village people’s access to essential resources. To improve the health of the people, he has organized more than 100 medical camps. When the terrible Corona crisis was looming large, Bhim Singh ji encouraged the people in his area to get vaccinated.
There are many people like Bhim Singh Bhavesh ji in different parts of the country, who are engaged in many such noble endeavours in the society. If we perform our duties as a responsible citizen, it will prove to be very helpful in building a strong nation.
My dear countrymen, the beauty of India lies in her diversity and also in the different hues of our culture. I feel good to see how many people are selflessly making efforts to preserve and beautify Indian culture. You will find such people in every part of India. Among these, a large number are also those who are working in the field of language. Mohammad Manshah ji of Ganderbal in Jammu and Kashmir has been engaged in efforts to preserve the Gojri language for the last three decades.
He comes from the Gujjar Bakarwal community which is a tribal community. In his childhood he had to work hard to study, he used to cover a distance of 20 kilometers on foot every day. Amidst such challenges, he obtained a Masters degree and it was only then that his resolve to preserve his language became stronger.
The scope of Manshah ji’s work in the field of literature is so extensive that it has been conserved in about 50 volumes. These also include poems and folk songs. He has translated many books into Gojri language.
Friends, Banwang Losu ji of Tirap in Arunachal Pradesh is a teacher. He has made an important contribution in the spread of Wancho language.
This language is spoken in Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland and some parts of Assam. He has undertaken the task of setting up a language school. A script of Vancho language has also been prepared. He is also teaching Wancho language to the coming generations so that it can be saved from extinction.
Friends, there are many people in our country who are engaged in preserving their culture and language through songs and dances. The life of Venkappa Ambaji Sugetkar of Karnataka, is also very inspiring in this regard. Sugatkar ji, resident of Bagalkot here, is a folk singer. He has sung more than 1000 Gondhali songs and has also widely propagated stories in this language. He has also imparted training to hundreds of students without charging any fees. There is no dearth of such people full of zeal and enthusiasm in India, who are continuously enriching our culture. You too take inspiration from them; try to do something of your own. You will feel immense satisfaction.
My dear countrymen, two days ago I was in Varanasi and there I saw a wonderful photo exhibition. The moments that the youth of Kashi and surrounding areas have captured on camera are amazing. There are many photographs in it which were taken with a mobile camera. Indeed, today anyone who has a mobile has become a content creator. Social media has also helped a lot in showcasing people’s skills and talents. Our young friends in India are doing wonders in the field of content creation.
No matter what social media platform it is, you will definitely find our young friends sharing varied content on different topics. Be it tourism, social cause, public participation or an inspiring life journey, various types of content related to these are available on social media. The voice of the youth of the country who are creating content has become very effective today. To honour their talent, the National Creators Award has been started in the country. Under this, preparations are being made to honour those change makers in different categories who are using technology to become effective voices of social change. This contest is running on MyGov and I would urge content creators to join it. If you also know such interesting content creators, then definitely nominate them for the National Creators Award.
My dear countrymen, I am happy that just a few days ago the Election Commission has started another campaign – ‘Mera Pehla Vote – Desh Ke Liye’. Through this, first time voters have been especially requested to vote in maximum numbers. India is proud of its youth power, full of enthusiasm and energy. The more our youth participate in the electoral process, the more beneficial its results will be for the country.
I would also urge first time voters to vote in record numbers. On turning 18, you are getting a chance to elect a member for the 18th Lok Sabha. That means this 18th Lok Sabha will also be a symbol of youth aspiration. That is why, the importance of your vote has risen further. Amidst this hustle and bustle of the general elections, you, the youth, should not only be a part of political activities but also remain aware of the discussions and debates during this period. And do remember – ‘My first vote – for the country’. I would also urge the influencers of the country, whether they are from the sports world, film industry, literature world, other professionals or our Instagram and YouTube influencers, they too should actively participate in this campaign and motivate our first time voters.
Friends, that’s all with me in this episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. The atmosphere of Lok Sabha elections is all pervasive in the country and as happened last time, there is a possibility that the code of conduct might also be in place in the month of March. It is a huge success of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ that in the last 110 episodes, we have kept it away from even the shadow of the government. In ‘Mann Ki Baat’, there is mention of the collective power of the country;
there is talk of the achievements of the country. In a way, this is a programme prepared by the people, for the people, through the people. But still, adhering to political decorum, ‘Mann Ki Baat’ will not be broadcast for the next three months in these days of Lok Sabha elections. Next when we will interact with you in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, it will be the 111th episode of ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Next time ‘Mann Ki Baat’ starting with the auspicious number 111… what could be better than that! But, friends, you have to keep performing one task for me. Even though ‘Mann Ki Baat’ is undergoing a break for three months, the achievements of the country will not stop even for a while, therefore, keep posting the achievements of the society and the country on social media with the hashtag ‘Mann Ki Baat’. Some time ago a young person had offered me a good suggestion. The suggestion is to share short videos in the form of YouTube Shorts from earlier episodes of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ so far. Therefore, I would urge the listeners of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ to share such shorts extensively. Friends, the next time I converse with you, I will meet you with new energy and new information.
Take care of yourself, thank you very much.
Namaskar.
My dear countrymen, Namaskar. The day all of us had been waiting for since February has finally arrived. Today I have come amidst you, my family members, once again through ‘Mann Ki Baat’. There is a very lovely saying – ‘Iti Vida Punarmilanaaya’, its connotation too, is equally lovely, I take leave of you, to meet again. With this very feeling, I had told you in February that I would meet you again after the election results. And today, with ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I am again present amongst you. I hope all of you are well, all at home are keeping well… and now the monsoon has also arrived… When the monsoon arrives, the mind also gets delighted. From today, once again, in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, we will talk about those countrymen who are bringing change in the society; in the country, through their endeavour. We will discuss our rich culture, our glorious history and our efforts towards making a developed India.
Friends, since February until now, whenever the last Sunday of the month would come, I would miss this dialogue with you a lot. But I was also very glad to see that in all these months, you sent me lakhs of messages.
The ‘Mann Ki Baat’ radio program may have been paused for a few months, but the spirit of ‘Mann Ki Baat’ in the country and society, touching upon the good work done every day, work done with selfless spirit, work having a positive impact on the society – carried on relentlessly. Amidst the news of the elections, you certainly would have noticed such news that touched the heart.
Friends, today I also thank the countrymen for having reiterated their unwavering faith in our Constitution and the democratic systems of the country. The 2024 elections were the biggest elections in the world. An election as big as this, in which 65 crore people cast their votes, has never taken place in any other country in the world. For this, I congratulate the Election Commission and everyone involved in the voting process. My dear countrymen, today, the 30th of June is a very important day. Our tribal brothers and sisters celebrate this day as ‘Hool Diwas’. This day is associated with the indomitable courage of Veer Sidhu-Kanhu, who strongly opposed the atrocities of the foreign rulers. Veer Sidhu-Kanhu united thousands of Santhal compatriots and fought the British with all their might. And do you know when this took place? This happened in 1855, that is, it happened two years before India’s first war of independence in 1857. Then, in Santhal Pargana of Jharkhand, our tribal brothers and sisters took up arms against the foreign rulers.
The British had committed many atrocities on our Santhal brothers and sisters, and had also imposed many types of restrictions on them. Veer Sidhu and Kanhu attained martyrdom while displaying amazing bravery in this struggle. The supreme sacrifice of these immortal sons of the land of Jharkhand inspires the countrymen even today. Let us listen to an excerpt from a song dedicated to them in Santhali language –
#Audio Clip#
My dear friends, if I ask you what the most precious relationship in the world is, you will certainly say – “Maa”, Mother. In the lives of all of us, the Mother holds the highest stature. A mother nurtures her child even after undergoing all kinds of hardships. Every mother showers limitless affection upon her child. This love of the mother who has given birth is like a debt on all of us, which no one can repay. I was thinking… we can’t give anything to our mother, but, can we do something else? Through this thought, a special campaign has been launched on World Environment Day this year. The name of this campaign is – ‘Ek Ped Maa Ke Naam’. I have also planted a tree in the name of my mother. I have appealed to all the countrymen; people of all the countries of the world to plant a tree along with their mothers, or in their name.
And I am immensely happy to see that the campaign to plant trees in memory of the mother or in her honor is progressing rapidly. On social media, People are sharing pictures of planting trees with their mothers or with their photographs. Everyone is planting trees for one’s mother – whether one is rich or poor, whether one is a working woman or a homemaker. This campaign has provided all of us with an equal opportunity to express affection towards mothers. They are inspiring others by sharing their pictures with #Plant4Mother and #Ek_Ped_Maa_Ke_Naam. Friends, this campaign shall benefit us in another way. The Earth also takes care of us like a mother. Mother Earth is the very basis of the lives of all of us… so it is our duty to take care of Mother Earth as well. The campaign to plant trees in the name of mother will not only honor our mother, but will also protect Mother Earth. During the last decade, through collective efforts, there has been an unprecedented expansion of forest area in India. During the Amrit Mahotsav, more than 60 thousand Amrit Sarovars have also been created across the country. Now we have to lend speed to the campaign of planting trees in the name of mother.
My dear countrymen, monsoon is spreading its hues rapidly in different parts of the country. And during this rainy season, the thing that has started being searched for in every home is the ‘umbrella’. Today in ‘Mann Ki Baat’, I want to tell you about a special kind of umbrella. These umbrellas are made in our Kerala.
In a way, umbrellas have a special significance in the culture of Kerala. Umbrellas are an important part of many traditions and rituals there. But the umbrella I am talking about is ‘Karthumbhi Umbrella’ and it is crafted in Attappady, Kerala. These colourful umbrellas are strikingly splendid. And the special fact is that these umbrellas are made by our tribal sisters of Kerala. Today the demand for these umbrellas is rising across the country. They are also being sold online. These umbrellas are made under the supervision of ‘Vattalakki Cooperative Farming Society’. This society is led by our woman power. Under the leadership of women, the tribal community of Attappady has displayed a wonderful example of entrepreneurship. This society has also established a bamboo-handicraft unit. These people are now also preparing to open a retail outlet and a traditional cafe. Their aim is not only to sell their umbrellas and other products, but they are also introducing their tradition, their culture to the world. Today Karthumbi umbrellas have completed their journey from a small village in Kerala to multinational companies. What could be a better example than this of being vocal for local?
My dear countrymen, by this time next month, the Paris Olympics would have begun. I am sure that all of you would also be waiting to cheer for the Indian sportspersons in these Olympic Games. I wish the Indian team the very best for the Olympic Games. The memories of the Tokyo Olympics are still fresh in our minds.
The performance of our players in Tokyo had won the heart of every Indian. Right after the Tokyo Olympics, our athletes were whole-heartedly engaged in the preparations for the Paris Olympics. If we take all the players together, then all of them have participated in nearly nine hundred international competitions. This is a very big number.
Friends, in the Paris Olympics, you will get to witness certain things for the first time. In shooting, the talent of our players is coming to the fore. Both men’s and women’s teams have qualified in table tennis. Our shooter daughters are also part of the Indian shotgun team. This time, members of our team will compete in wrestling and horse riding in those categories as well, in which they had never participated before. From this, you can make out that this time we will see a different level of excitement in sports. You might remember… a few months ago, we displayed our best performance in the World Para Athletics Championship. Our players have also won glorious laurels in chess and badminton. Now the whole country is hoping that our players perform well in the Olympics as well… win medals in these games and also win the hearts of the countrymen. In the coming days, I will also get an opportunity to meet the Indian team. I will encourage them on your behalf. And yes, this time our hashtag is #Cheer4Bharat.
Through this hashtag, we have to cheer our players… keep encouraging them. So keep up the momentum… this momentum of yours will help in showing the magic of India to the world.
My dear countrymen, I am playing a small audio clip for all of you.
#Audio Clip#
You must have also been surprised to hear this radio program, right? So come, let me tell you the whole story behind it. Actually, this is a clip of a broadcast of Kuwait Radio. Now you might think that since we are talking about Kuwait, how did Hindi get there? Actually, the Kuwait government has started a special program on its National Radio. And that too in Hindi. It is broadcast every Sunday for half an hour on Kuwait Radio. It includes myriad shades of Indian culture. Our films and discussions related to the art world are very popular among the Indian community there. I have even been told that the local people of Kuwait are also taking a lot of interest in it. I thank the government of Kuwait and the people there from the core of my heart for taking this wonderful initiative.
Friends, which Indian will not be happy with the way our culture is earning glory all over the world today! For example, in Turkmenistan, the 300th birth anniversary of its national poet was celebrated in May this year. On this occasion, the President of Turkmenistan unveiled the statues of 24 famous poets of the world. One of these statues is also that of Gurudev Rabindranath Tagore.
This is an honour for Gurudev; an honour for India. Similarly, in the month of June, two Caribbean countries Suriname and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines celebrated their Indian heritage with full zeal and enthusiasm. The Indian community in Suriname celebrates 5 June every year as Indian Arrival Day and Pravasi Din. Bhojpuri is also widely spoken here, along with Hindi. The number of our brothers and sisters of Indian origin living in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is also around six thousand. All of them are very proud of their heritage. The way they celebrated Indian Heritage Day on the 1st of June with great jubilation reflects this feeling. Every Indian feels proud when such a spread of Indian heritage and culture is seen all over the world.
Friends, this month the whole world celebrated the 10th Yoga Day with great enthusiasm and zeal. I also participated in the yoga program organized in Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir. In Kashmir, along with the youth, sisters and daughters also participated enthusiastically on Yoga Day. As the observance of Yoga Day is progressing, even new records are being made. Yoga Day has attained many great achievements all over the world. For the first time in Saudi Arabia, a woman, Al Hanouf Saad ji, led the common yoga protocol. This is the first time a Saudi woman has instructed a main yoga session. This time in Egypt, a photo competition was organized on Yoga Day. The pictures of lakhs of people performing yoga on the banks of the Nile River, on the beaches of the Red Sea and in front of the pyramids became very popular. Myanmar’s Maravijaya Pagoda Complex, famous for its Marble Buddha Statue, is world famous. Here too, a splendid Yoga Session was organized on the 21st of June. A special camp was organized for Divyang children in Bahrain. A memorable Yoga Session was also held at Galle Fort, famous for its UNESCO heritage site in Sri Lanka. People also did Yoga at the Observation Deck in New York, USA. The President of Marshall Islands also participated in the Yoga Day program organized there on a large scale for the first time. A grand Yoga Day program was also organized in Thimpu, Bhutan, in which my friend Prime Minister Tobgay also participated. That is, we all saw panoramic views of people doing Yoga in every corner of the world. I express my heartfelt gratitude to all the friends who participated on Yoga Day. And then there is this long standing request of mine. We do not have to make Yoga just a one-day practice. You should do Yoga regularly. You will certainly feel positive changes in your life by doing this. Friends, there are so many products of India which are in great demand all over the world and when we see a local product of India going global, it is natural to feel proud. One such product is Araku coffee. Araku coffee is produced in large quantities in Alluri Sita Rama Raju district of Andhra Pradesh. It is known for its rich flavour and aroma. Around 1.5 lakh tribal families are associated with the cultivation of Araku coffee. Girijan cooperative has played a very important role in taking Araku coffee to new heights. It brought together the farmer brothers and sisters here and encouraged them to cultivate Araku coffee.
This has also enhanced the income of these farmers a lot. The Konda Dora tribal community has also benefited a lot from this. Along with income, they are also getting a life of dignity. I remember once I got a chance to taste this coffee in Visakhapatnam with the Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh Chandrababu Naidu Garu. And it’s taste…! This coffee is amazing! Araku coffee has received many global awards. The coffee was also a hit at the G-20 summit held in Delhi. Whenever you get a chance, you must enjoy Araku coffee.
Friends, the people of Jammu and Kashmir are also not lagging behind in making local products global. What Jammu and Kashmir has achieved last month is an example for people across the country. The first consignment of snow peas was sent to London from Pulwama here. Some people got the idea… why not bring the exotic vegetables grown in Kashmir onto the world map! And lo and behold… Abdul Rashid Mir of Chakura village was the first to come forward for this. He started growing snow peas by integrating the land of other farmers of the village and within no time, snow peas started reaching London from Kashmir. This success has opened new doors for the prosperity of the people of Jammu and Kashmir. There is no dearth of such unique products in our country. You must share such products with #myproductsmypride. I will also touch upon this topic in the upcoming ‘Mann Ki Baat’.
Mam Priya: Deshvasin:
Adya Aham Kinchhit Charcha Sanskrit Bhashayaam Aarabhe.
You must be thinking why I am suddenly speaking in Sanskrit in ‘Mann Ki Baat’? The reason for this is a special occasion related to Sanskrit today! Today, on the 30th of June, the Sanskrit Bulletin of Akashvani is completing 50 years of its broadcast. For 50 years, this bulletin has kept so many people connected to Sanskrit. I congratulate the All India Radio family.
Friends, Sanskrit has played a big role in the progress of ancient Indian knowledge and science. The demand of today’s times is that we should respect Sanskrit and also connect it with our daily life. Nowadays, many people are making such an effort in Bengaluru. There is a park in Bengaluru – Cubbon Park! In this park, the people here have started a new tradition. Here, once a week, every Sunday, children, youth and elders talk to each other in Sanskrit. Not only this, many debate sessions are also organised in Sanskrit. The name of this initiative is Sanskrit Weekend! It has been started by Samashti Gubbi ji through a website. This initiative which started a few days ago has become very popular among the people of Bengaluru.
If we all join such efforts, we will get to learn a lot from such an ancient and scientific language of the world.
My dear countrymen, it was great to connect with you in this episode of Mann ki Baat. Now this series will continue once again as earlier. The holy Rath Yatra is going to start after a week from now. It’s my solemn wish that the blessings of Mahaprabhu Jagannath always remain on all the countrymen. The Amarnath Yatra has also commenced, and in the next few days, the Pandharpur Wari is also about to start. I wish all the devotees participating in these Yatras all the best. Just ahead is also the festival of the Kutchi New Year – Ashadhi Beej. Many best wishes to all of you for all these festivals too. I am of the firm belief that you will keep sharing such efforts of public participation related to positivity with me. I am waiting to connect with you again next month. Till then please take care of yourself and your family as well. Thank you very much. Namaskar.
